## Unbuilding the World Trade Center;or, Another Vaguely Political Post

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2005/11/unbuilding_the_.html
 * Sunday, November 06, 2005



William Langewische's "American Ground" articles—first published in _The Atlantic Monthly_ and later compiled into the slim but substantial _[American Ground](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?link\_code=ur2&camp=1789&tag=diesekoschmar-20&creative=9325&path=http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0865476756)_![image](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=diesekoschmar-20&l=ur2&o=1)—passionately describe the "unbuilding of the World Trade Center" without ever invoking the larger consequences of its destruction.  The War on Terror never enters the scene.  Neither does the Bush Administration.  The fallen Twin Towers don't _represent_ the first volley in a global conflict so much as they _are_ the lost livelihood of the men who helped build, manage and later dismantle them.  Not that Langewische even needed to allude to the burdensome emotional and metaphorical baggage of that day or its daily evocation.  It is the undefendable slapshot in the game of American politics, the justification for affairs foreign and domestic.  He need not say anymore.  Yet his deliberate decision to focus on the lives of those who work "the pile" still unsettles me.  How can he _not_ talk about the impact their fall had on American politics, on affairs both foreign and domestic?  How can he concentrate on the lives of the engineers who "unbuild" these fallen metaphors of American eminence when they fell because they were metaphors and were mourned for much the same reason?  

Early in the article he provides one possible explanation:
But the buildings were not buildings anymore, and the place where they fell had become a tabula rasa for the United States.  Among the ruins now, a large and unscripted experiment in American life had gotten under way.

This "unscripted experiment" does not consist of patriotic pablum, but of the "emergence" of order from chaos.  Cognates of "emerge" litter the essay, appearing almost any time he discusses the organizational structure of the recovery effort.  The strict hierarchies of corporate America, the networks of old boys returning favors—they all falter and collapse at the site.  They are replaced with the very substance they claim to embody: the meritorious selection of those who can get the job done on the basis of their getting the job done.  The meritocracy of the pile put to lie the "meritocracy" of corporate America by consistently selecting those best suited to the job; but "selected," Langewiesche suggests, is too strong a word, and so he employs "emerges" instead.  Why did the old boy network break down?  Langewiesche offers some clues:
Freon is a manufactured product containing chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs),
and its use has been restricted by international accord because of the
damage it does to the atmosphere's protective ozone layer. The threat
it posed at the Trade Center was more immediate, and stemmed from the
fact that it is a heavy gas and it aggressively displaces the oxygen in
the air that people breathe. With the huge quantities potentially
involved here (as much as 168,000 pounds, under pressure, if the tanks
remained intact), a sudden leak would fill the voids underground and
spread across the surface of the pile, suffocating perhaps hundreds of
workers caught out on the rough terrain and unable to move fast. To
make matters worse, if the Freon cloud came in contact with open
flames, of which there were plenty here, it would turn into airborne
forms of hydrochloric and hydrofluoric acids and also phosgene gas,
related to the mustard gas used during World War I. Then it would go
drifting. Evacuation sirens were installed around the edges of the
pile, but in tests they often failed. Evacuation maps were printed with
elaborate routes and mustering points, but of course they were not
read. People accepted the danger. The standard advice, "Just run like
hell," was delivered with a little shrug. Everyone knew that if the
Freon came hunting for you at the center of the pile, you would succumb.

I would want the most competent person I could find in charge of determining whether Freon still posed a problem.  Then again, I would want the most competent I could find in charge of a number of other issues, foremost among them the whole business of governing the United States and running the War in Iraq.  Why did the overwhelming danger, the potential loss of human life trump the old boy's connections in this case?  The answer, quite simply, is that the old boys had run from the towers when they fell, whereas the working class ran towards them.  The old boys were busy grandstanding—holding bullhorns in front of flags, running around blaming some people who blaming some people for some people's statements about some other people—whereas the people who would unbuild the Twin Towers were on site, shovels in hand, bucket in hands, for days on end.  They unbuilt the Towers because they cared more about people than politics.  And while it should be said that the statement "caring more about people than politics" is more often than not the empty word of a politician to the core, the majority of the people involved in the unbuilding were engineers, construction workers, fire fighters and the like.  I don't think they imagined a future career in politics.  (Some of them did, mind you.  Two in particular.  But when you deal with human beings you have to expect the occasional opportunist.  That there weren't more, I suppose, speaks to the validity of my point.)

Thus ends this somber post.  I should teach more fun material this late in the quarter.  

		
