## Strawberries Under Ice Stations

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2005/04/strawberries_un.html
 * Monday, April 25, 2005



I started thinking about writing this earlier today as a Google-cascade of interesting facts overwhelmed me, but as is often the case, further research proves that initial push-to-conclusion built on the poor foundation of coincidence.  This reflects, as does everything right now, on my dissertation and the trial of its writing.  I want to walk you through this failure not because it's mine, although it is, but because it's representative.  I start with an anecdote from this morning: 

In one of the stranger essays I teach, "Strawberries Under Ice," David Quammen avoids metaphor and analogy by fiat.  First he says
Ablation is the scientists' fancy word for loss.  Down here the mass balance is negative.  Ice is supplied to this zone mainly by flow from above, little or not at all by direct precipitation, and whatever does come as direct precipitation is less than the amount annually lost.  The loss results from several different processes: wind erosion, surface melting, evaporation (ice does evaporate), underside melting of an ice shelf where it rests on the warmer seawater.  Calving off of icebergs.  Calving is the scientists' quaint word for that event when a great hunk of ice--as big as a house, or in some cases, as big as a country--tears away from the leading edge of the sheet or glacier and falls thunderously into the sea. (200)

The diction of that first sentence signals the coming metaphor, but instead Quammen relates a process, a few of them actually, through which ablation whittles away at everything from ice cubes to Antarctica.  He resists the movement into a metaphorical or analogical register even though he knows his readers will move in that direction:
Possibly this talk about calving reflects an unspoken sense that the larger ice mass, moving, pulsing, constantly changing its shape, is almost alive.  If so the analogy doesn't go far.  Icebergs don't suckle or grow.  They float away on the sea, melt, break apart, disappear.  Wind erosion and evaporation and most of those other ablative processes work on the ice slowly, incrementally.  Calving on the other hand is abrupt.  A large piece of the whole is there, and then gone.

The strange asyndeton (omission of conjunctions) in the fourth sentence notwithstanding, this paragraph's plain spoken science resists readers' desire to read these glaciological facts as pertaining to Quammen, his life or that much-maligned abstraction, "the human condition."  Calving is a fact of glaciation, not an analogy by which humans can come, metaphorically or analogically, to understand the processes governing their lives.  "The analogy," Quammen insists, "doesn't go far."  So how to explain the article's abrupt shift?
I came home to find a note in my door.  The note said that a young woman I knew, the great love of a friend of mine, was dead...I learned the woman had died from a fall.  A freak accident...She had slipped on a patch of sidewalk ice, the night before, and hit her head. (201)

My students, now, are screaming.  "CALVING CALVING CALVING THIS WOMAN WAS CALVED FROM QUAMMEN'S LIFE CALVED WE TELL YOU CALVED!"  They're right to recognize that Quammen's manipulating them, but they can't accept the implications of it.  He denies them the comfortable metaphorical and analogical registers, creating instead a series of pregnant juxtapositions, forcing his readers to make the connections he refuses to.  Quammen's demonstrating the way in which a scholar or writer's research colors all aspects of his or her life, creating meaningful but ultimately irrelevant juxtapositions of research and lived experience.  When artfully done, as in Quammen's work, or A.S. Byatt in _Angels and Insects_, this narrative mode is compelling and forceful, especially to those who devote their lives to research.  

However, there be dragons, as anyone who's slogged through the lesser productions of identity politicians.  Quammen's article works because the processes he describes are ideologically neutral.  Other works fail because they assume that nothing is or ever will be ideologically neutral.\*  As for the work that inspired this post, the series of interesting but ultimately irrelevant connections I mentioned in passing, I've written myself out.  Let this stand in its place: Francis Olmsted, Louisiana State University, Huey Long, St. Louis Union Station, the 1893 World's Fair and [these](http://www.railpixs.com/stations/I&GN-StationAtSanAntonio-inside1-March82.jpg) [haunting](http://www.railpixs.com/stations/I&GN-StationAtSanAntonio-inside2-March82.jpg) [photographs](http://www.railpixs.com/stations/I&GN-StationAtSanAntonio-inside3-March82.jpg) [of](http://www.railpixs.com/stations/I&GN-StationAtSanAntonio-inside5-March82.jpg) [the interior of the International & Great Northern Station](http://www.railpixs.com/stations/I&GN-StationAtSanAntonio-outside2-March82.jpg) in San Antonio, Texas.

\*I mention no names here, as elsewhere, because my mother told me that if you can't say anything nice, don't point.  

		
