## Hate the Sinner?  The Sin?  The Dated Rhetoric of Empowerment?

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2005/03/hate_the_sinner.html
 * Saturday, March 19, 2005



I agree with the content of what follows.  I agree with its intent.  I agree with the programs it entails.  But this writer believes that the masses will rally around a leader who howls from his finger-tips that "ordinary people ... use race in [their] minds ... so that they have overlooked the true subjectivity and positionality of the very people they purport to liberate!"   (I've added an exclamation point because the sentence alone fails to communicate the prose's hoarse, shrill screech.)  Here's the whole awful howl:
_Some Race Crits asked if their legal scholarship was too ethereal.  They ve asked if they needed practical writings, ones purposefully directed toward the poor, the disempowered, and underrepresented.  This shift in writing style, purpose, and focus confessed, at the very least, that Race Crits recognized that they were not effective.  They were not plugging the leaky damn.  Practical, activist, and engaged legal scholarship was perhaps the missing tool.  Well, its_ [sic] _not the tool.  The real tool is the question that Race Crits fear to ask, and this question requires them to destroy  race as a mindset, regardless of who wields it. Did they only intend to interrogate  race so that they could wrest it from  white clutches?  If so, they should have achieved that end by exposing the degree to which  white privilege invisibly operated in all of our lives.  It s not enough.  They still search for the silver bullet by which to kill the mangy werewolf called white racism.   Perhaps Race Crits have not forged the silver bullet because they have not been prepared to destroy  race altogether.  

Race is a concept that resides in our minds.  We build our identity around this limited, liberal concept of the self.  Our minds are not neutral places, but dynamic environs where we co-create ourselves, realities, and experiences.  By not critically redressing how we, ordinary people, use  race in our minds, Race Crits have engaged in a lesser degree of abstract analysis, so that they have overlooked the true subjectivity and positionality of the very people they purport to liberate. If so, why have Race Crits been unwilling to interrogate the subjectively positioned minds of ordinary people?  They willingly probe white race consciousness.  Ordinary people like minorities have consciousness too, and if so, is it raced?  If a white race consciousness spoils and corrupts white citizens so that they consciously or otherwise engage in racist practices, then ordinary people like minorities differ little from white citizens, thus using their very powerful minds in self-annihilating ways so that they co-create realities and experiences that destroy, if not consistently delay, their best laid plans for self-actualization and self-empowerment._

That this earnest and eminently sensible call to undermine the scientific nonsense that is "race" will go unheeded saddens me.  That it will go unheeded because this writer, and others like him, know that this perspiring prose--with its sophomoric neologisms and painful academic cliches--increases his likelihood of someday landing tenure, well, let me finish that sentence with a passage from Berton Roueche's "The Incurable Wound":
_An excessive flow of thick tenacious saliva pours over his face and neck and becomes smeared on his hands and clothes and over the beeding and floor.  These periods of rage are followed by moments of calm in which [he] usually shows anxiety for the safety of those around him and warns them of the approach of another crisis.  Hyperesthesia of the skin to changes in temperature, and especially to currents of air, and increased sensitiveness to sound and light mark the progress of cerebral irritation.  Convulsions are brought on by the least irritation and by the slightest current of air ... the breath comes in spasms, dyspnea is extreme, and there are epileptiform seizures or tetanic rigidity ... there is an immediate viselike contraction of the muscles of deglutition with an excruciatingly painful spasm of the glottis and the pharynx.  The body trembles with convulsive movements, the jaws are clenched, respiration is impossible ... and ... the mention of the word brings on an attack..._
		
