## Psychoanalysis or "When did you stop sodomizing your mother?"

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2005/04/psychoanalysis_.html
 * Friday, April 01, 2005



Psychoanalysis compels laughter from everyone who doesn't belong to the small (and hopefully shrinking) tribe of untrained, unqualified but proudly "professional" pseudo-psychoanalysts who populate English departments.  I ignore them whenever possible--and shudder when I consider what they would make of my name\*--because their every word they say causes my more important veins to veinify.  Arguing against psychoanalytic concepts, I've found, one must inevitably participate in a "psychoanalytic discourse."  Therein lies the problem.  Take, for example, Kristeva's attempt to refute Lacan's claims about the Phallus.  The result?  Tthe theory of the Chora--literally Greek for "womb"--which, in a nutshell, states that since men write from the Phallus, women ought to write from the Chora, which
as rupture and articulations (rhythm), precedes evidence, verisimilitude, spatiality, and temporality.  Our discourse--all discourse--moves with and against the _chora_ in the sense that it simultaneously depends upon and refuses it.  Although the _chora_ can be designated and regulated, it can never be definitively posited: as a result, one can situate the _chora_ and, if necessary, lend it a topology, but one can never give it axiomatic form (26).

Or, in the words [Seda Peksen](http://meowpower.org/current/amp021.html) (an English graduate student from Middle East Technical University in Ankara)
The chora is associated with the mother's body.  It is unrepresentable.  Therefore, women's language should come from the chora which is a place we know from the semiotic but have forgotten when we entered the symbolic...Thus the chora is the place in woman's body that gives birth to her language.  Even if women do not attempt at creating a language that comes from the chora, yet somtimes there are eruptions of the semiotic in the symbolic order.  These eruptions are mainly poetic such as silences...

While it may appear I'm forcing some guffaws at a non-native speaker's ESL defects, I'm not entirely sure that she has an ESL problem.  She may, in fact, have a theory induced writing disorder (TIWD) that's put her in the uncomfortable position of having to write poorly on purpose in her non-native tongue.  That she makes any sense whatsoever is a testament to an intellect that atrophies with every sentence she reads and every sentence she writes.  She and her cohorts at [Meowpower](http://meowpower.org) are obviously bright, motivated scholars, so I hate to be the bearer of dread knowledge.  But I will be.  Because they're responsible for sphacelating whatever little brain fold helped me identify self-parody.  To wit:
I am
struggling to write-and live-some other corporeality. If I succeed I
will butcher the tendency toward both textual and bodily assimilation.
The underbelly cut open, vulnerable, fragmented, and inconsistent, is
astutely mine. A body or a text without normative punctuality is
obscene, unrequited. It arrives late to the masquerade, attracts
fearful attention during the dance, and absconds alone and abashed.
Textual mortification signifies a death of possibility. The text and
the body entangled so that centuries of repression of the body spawn
infinite chapters of standardized discourse. If the ears repeatedly
hear the phrase "remember", the purveyor (us) is less likely to produce
dreary and banal discourse. Yet the cultural mantra most often heard is
"forget", whispered hypnotically while we squirm through institutions.
Forget what enraptures you and do what everyone else has done. Walk
down a corridor enclosed by walls, enter a lackluster room. The docile
body begins here. Construct yourself as you have already been
constructed; repeat what you have remembered; develop ways to cope with
the cemented punctuation of your body (or text) 

Knowledge I knew but
embodiment evaded me. McRuer infers that I should be able to
encapsulate bodily difference inside text. Cixous did it. Many have
dug a deeper trench than I am about to dig. I am writing the body into
the ground. The embodied feminized earth, dark sin (without) an
association with war. Strategic disembowlment or as McRuer writes,
de-composition. Though its not of any body nor is it anybody. It's a
specific body. One unencumbered by any other. Pleasantly unadjudicated.
The phrase itself-_the body_-evolved as a linguistic conundrum. Many have said that no universal entity exists called _the body_. It would bewilder us if some iconoclast referred to every tree as-_the tree_-yet
we constantly legitimate a universal body without ever remembering the
fallacy. This anomaly of universalizing many bodies into one body
signifies the extent to which culture demands that all bodies measure
up to the universalized One. Greek god hails judiciously from past
centuries. Most of us flee.

I choose content, voice,
and tone and steer discourse and materiality away from what is
familiar. That's what scared the anonymous him. Not just its mention,
but mostly its significance. Writing vulva n(ot any old vulva but a
vulva that resembles no other vulv)a. Putting vulva back into the
equation. Googling it (try it), understanding it, staring at the photos
in its irregular, incoherent, loose wet state. The response was one of
"hmmm" (himmm) "what do you mean, this writing on the body?" I am told
not to-that it won't get me published or it won't be appropriate or
neat or nice. We need information instead "we are looking for objective
information. An (al)maniacal deluge would not be enough information.
Can't you write nice?

When Cixous wrote the body
30 years ago she wanted women to put themselves into the text, dig
deep, write out-loud, and reconfigure phallocentric language (try
google-ing "phallocentric language" and you'll find "step outside
phallocentric language" under the heading of "alien"). Strategic
disembodiment happens at birth when they slap it out of you. You were a
body now you are a gender. The third gender puzzles doctors everytime
as if something that happens naturally somehow is not a natural
happening. Stagnant. Still. Everything is fine in its little box,
tightly concealed. From womb through the canal squeezed out into space
(defined by matter) while momma is sewn back together. You were a
gender now you are a worker. Not any worker but a worker that resembles
no other worker. Punctilious. 

Freelance will do that to
you. Digging a deep trench, I shove corpus animus down into the earth
and feel the muck and sludge of so many failures. Can't you write nice?
As the one universalized body must be ideal, so must the text. Even the
term "the essay" fondles modernist rhetoric. The literary essay is
known both quantitatively and qualitatively as the great warrior
Hannibal (who was actually black). I want to write the body because it
is dangerous and erotic. Writing matters only when I write the
underbelly of the essay. Bodies and texts are socially constructed so
that I do not wish to replicate uniformity or able-bodiedness in my
writing. This essay is not to be judged against an ideal yet it is
meant to be embodied in a person, a voice, hands typing, sexuality,
ethnicity. Ideology is unveiling the skin beneath your clothing.
Concepts are the fullness of your curve. Embodiment happens when events
occur, when reality of the body is the presiding phenomenon at that
time. Bodies have been extracted from history and reality except as 1)
ideal or 2) disfigured, deformed, or abnormal. No. 1 exploits no. 2.
Embodiment is agency when mind/body subject/object public/private
coalesce. The scene is institutional hegemony and the act is resisting
the compulsion to submit to anything other than what is safely erotic.
You are the agent. As Burke writes, the bodily overlaps with both the
intimate and the institutional. Foucault's "docile body" stiffens with
today's perfunctory education and we have lost contact with our
underbellies.

Hang on. The health of this
text is at risk. It is at risk of being scorned by neocons and
traditionalists-or worse-of not being published. This text as my body
might be colonized or forgotten. The cultural practice of composition
offers no protection against vulnerability or perfectionism. The body
must be strengthened, manicured, and fixed…continuously. The
text must be primed for the swim suit competition. Only those without
prior health conditions need apply as if there is this other universal
thing called "health". Show me the perfect person and I'll show you the
perfect text. I am hobbling away now.

Fish in a barrel, my friend, fish in a barrel. 

\*A Lacanian with whom I briefly shared an office once informed me, and I paraphrase here, that "Lacan thought seriously about names and their effect on development.  I don't see anything wrong with teaching a lesson in a freshman composition class on how Richard Caputo's politics derive from the fact that he is, nominally and probably really too, a 'dick head.'"  

		

* * *

### 2 Comments 

		

                
[]()

	

		![Your Advisor](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/18-50si.gif)
	

	

		

This is your advisor, "Acephalous." Get back to work, smartass! I want your completed dissertation in my box by Tuesday.

	

		Posted by:
		Your Advisor |
		[Friday, 01 April 2005 at 08:07 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2005/04/psychoanalysis\_.html?cid=4699316#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00d8343f130953ef)

[]()

	

		![A. Cephalous](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/17-50si.gif)
	

	

		

Fuck you, Michael, fuck you.  Seriously, I'm working on it right now, sir, and it'll be done by the end of the week.  LATEST.  Or by next Monday, but that's it sir, the absolute latest, and I can pull it off sooner if I don't sleep, don't teach, don't eat, the boy's a time-bomb...

	

		Posted by:
		[A. Cephalous](http://acephalous.typepad.com) |
		[Saturday, 02 April 2005 at 09:21 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2005/04/psychoanalysis\_.html?cid=4712268#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00d8343f27a053ef)

		

        