## Another MLA Panel You Dread Attending

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/05/another_mla_pan.html
 * Wednesday, May 17, 2006



[_Some of you may be looking [the meme post](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/11/measuring\_the\_s.html)..._]

So that MLA panel I mentioned proposing a few months back was, miraculously, accepted.  I don't know how the it slipped past The Man whose boot's been firmly planted on my neck the past three years, but I suspect it had something to do with the other panelists.  (_Cue [Technotronic](http://www.amazon.com/gp/music/wma-pop-up/B000002UVV001001/ref=mu\_sam\_wma\_001\_001/104-1873006-1699925)_)  Are you ready for this?

**Meet the Bloggers: Blogging and the Future of Academia**  
 **Organizer – Scott Eric Kaufman**

In his June 6, 2003 Chronicle of Higher Education [article on academic
blogging](http://chronicle.com/free/v49/i39/39a01401.htm), David Glenn waxed skeptical about its future, noting that
many "academic bloggers worry that the medium smells faddish,
ephemeral." Two years later, The Chronicle established a special
section of "Careers" devoted to "[Links to Academic Blogs](http://chronicle.com/jobs/blogs.htm)." What
happened in the intervening months was nothing short of an explosion in
the number, the quality and public attention brought to bear on
academic blogs. The 2005 MLA convention featured four panels which
addressed this phenomenon. Each treated blogging as a stable genre with
the potential to evolve into a professional or pedagogical asset, but
they could only speculate as to what prominent bloggers would do. This
proposed panel differs from those in that it will feature four of the
most prominent academic bloggers discussing a future they possess the
power and influence to shape. The bloggers in question, followed by
their rank in "The Truth Laid Bear" ecosystem of all (not merely
academic) blogs are: [John Holbo](http://www.crookedtimber.org/) (#36), [[Bitch Ph.D.](http://bitchphd.blogspot.com/)] (#148), [Michael
Bérubé](http://michaelberube.com/) (#198), and [Scott Eric Kaufman](http://acephalous.typepad.com/) (#1502).   

 Michael
Bérubé's "Instantaneous Citation Index" moves beyond current
conversations about "online scholarly communities" to address the
mechanisms of citation and influence-tracking among academic bloggers.
His paper argues that insofar as services like Technorati and Google
allow blogging scholars to determine the issues commanding the
attention of their peers with increasing speed and accuracy, they
constitute a new kind of apparatus for the charting the dissemination
of ideas, an apparatus that is supplemental–in both senses–to
"professional" devices of measurement such as the Arts and Humanities
Citation Index.  

[Bitch Ph.D.]'s "I'm Nobody! Who are You?" turns
to the question of pseudonymous blogging and its place in the community
Bérubé describes. Beginning with the oft-noted parallels between
pseudonymous blogging, which has become a staple among academic blogs,
and the tradition of the eighteenth-century periodical essay, in which
pseudonymity was a generic convention, her paper discusses the
possibilities of voice in blogging and the ways that pseudonymity,
particularly among junior faculty, graduate students, and women, allows
us to speak about "private" matters in a "public" forum. In the realm
of print culture, blogging puts pressure on the relationship between
the author function and the question of textual ownership. In academia,
it raises the question of what the role of casual writing is with
relationship to "publication" (or "service," or "teaching"). More
importantly, however, this question–like that of textual
ownership–presents an implicit challenge to a profession that, on the
one hand, practices blind review and, on the other, has a
well-established and powerful hierarchy.  

 John Holbo's "Follows
the Function of the Little Magazine" argues that while the future of
academic publication is digital, it is not foregone conclusion that the
academic publishing culture will fully embrace the possibilities
technology brings. Blogging is not the future of scholarship, but the
rather unloveable little word will do as a placeholder as prominent
scholars and bloggers explore these possibilities. Scholarship should
want what blogging has: efficient, affordable distribution; healthy
growth; large readerships; good conversations; interdisciplinary
cross-pollination; public intellectualism. Last but not least, Holbo
claims, blogs hold out the prospect for large conversations; that is,
for a great mass of contributions to be mediated and sifted in a manner
which is, if not ideal, yet impressively organic. It is hard to design
a circulatory system capable of handling the output of the MLA's 30,000
members, one equal to the task of ensuring their ideas have a
reasonable chance of finding ways to the readers they deserve, for
better or worse. Building on what Bérubé will argue, Holbo notes how
the sheer volume of the blogosphere gives hints about ways academic
conversations can stay healthy, given the numbers of participants they
should accommodate. In this paper he will suggest what changes are
needed: in terms of forms, in terms of the "reputation economy" that
rewards production, in terms of general publishing culture. His thesis
will be that academic publishing must not only make itself over
electronically, but make itself into a "gift culture." Academics live
in a world of google book and Amazon "search inside," but also of
copyright extension and, in general, excessive I.P. enclosures. The
groves of academe are well suited to be exemplary Creative Commons. As
there is no guarantee they will be, Holbo argues, all academics should
work for that.   

 Scott Eric Kaufman's "The New
Interdisciplinary" contends that the blogosphere offers new
possibilities for both inter- and intradisciplinary work. Drawing from
his own experience, Kaufman demonstrates how a blog chronicling an
English graduate student's dissertation on evolutionary theory in fin
de siecle American literature can be read and commented upon by
historians, philosophers, historians and philosophers of science,
evolutionary biologists, and sociologists. Such feedback encourages the
growth and development of projects with a sound interdisciplinary
foundation and functions as a check on the long-standing and oft-voiced
concerns about interdisciplinary work: blog-savvy interdisciplinarians
need not be, as W.B. Cameron called interdisciplinarians in 1965,
"dilettantes" producing works of "dubious quality." Kaufman will argue
that the blogosphere affords scholars the opportunity to easily and
enthusiastically cross heretofore closely guarded disciplinary
boundaries. Furthermore, it enables academics within increasingly
balkanized disciplines to reconnect without necessitating a return of
the generalist.

		

* * *

### 7 Comments 

		

                
[]()

	

		![Rich Puchalsky](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/15-50si.gif)
	

	

		

Sounds interesting and amusing, Scott ... but still a little bit blog-triumphial, doesn't it?   Let me make a few additions to complete the unsanitized version:

Michael Bérubé's "Instantaneous Criticism Index" demonstrates that when you blog, you too can become the target of Horowitzian screeds labelling you a dangerous professor.

[Bitch Ph.D.]'s "I'm a Defendant! Who are You?" turns to the question of pseudonymous blogging and whether it is good enough to fend off lame libel suit threats.

John Holbo's "Follows the Squabble of the Little Magazine" argues that it is not a foregone conclusion that the academic publishing culture will fully embrace the possibilities for long-term flame war that technology brings.

Scott Eric Kaufman's "The New And Wholly Unselective Interdisciplinary" contends that the blogosphere offers new possibilities for both inter- and intradisciplinary work. Drawing from his own experience, Kaufman demonstrates how a blog chronicling an English graduate student's dissertation on evolutionary theory in fin de siecle American literature and anecdotes about office sex can be read and commented upon by insane trolls, failed bullies, dilettantes who do not work in academia at all, and "interdisciplinary" righteous defenders of something or other, in addition to more or less reasonable and informed people.  Such feedback encourages the growth and development of chronic loss of sleep.

	

		Posted by:
		Rich Puchalsky |
		[Thursday, 18 May 2006 at 09:29 AM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/05/another\_mla\_pan.html?cid=17424527#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00d834c0afbd69e2)

[]()

	

		![Kevin Andre Elliott](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/16-50si.gif)
	

	

		

Congrats, Scott. I plan on attending this year. I'll be there. 

	

		Posted by:
		[Kevin Andre Elliott](http://www.slanttruth.com/) |
		[Thursday, 18 May 2006 at 03:02 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/05/another\_mla\_pan.html?cid=17442228#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00d834c0f22269e2)

[]()

	

		![Brian](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/01-50si.gif)
	

	

		

Wow - someday I'll be able to say that I used to comment at Acephalous way back when it was cool...

	

		Posted by:
		Brian |
		[Thursday, 18 May 2006 at 04:04 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/05/another\_mla\_pan.html?cid=17444948#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00d8348b890353ef)

[]()

	

		![The Little Womedievalist](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/07-50si.gif)
	

	

		

Oh, yeah. (Yeah!)......... yes, indeed. 

	

		Posted by:
		The Little Womedievalist |
		[Friday, 19 May 2006 at 01:57 AM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/05/another\_mla\_pan.html?cid=17457977#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00d834c10f2369e2)

[]()

	

		![Whining Stranger](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/07-50si.gif)
	

	

		

At the risk of being juvenile and flippant, I will say that I dread attending EVERY MLA panel.  And the whole conference in general.

Make it stop!

	

		Posted by:
		[Whining Stranger](http://whiningstranger.blogspot.com) |
		[Tuesday, 23 May 2006 at 04:34 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/05/another\_mla\_pan.html?cid=17658273#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00d834c2088c69e2)

[]()

	

		![vatergrrl](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/02-50si.gif)
	

	

		

Mental energy willing and your panel doesn't coincide with either of mine, I'll be sure to add your session to my list. Now, if only I'd receive my program in the mail...

	

		Posted by:
		vatergrrl |
		[Wednesday, 29 November 2006 at 04:54 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/05/another\_mla\_pan.html?cid=25925885#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00d834ff954569e2)

[]()

	

		![sarah](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/16-50si.gif)
	

	

		

"Kaufman will argue that the blogosphere affords scholars the opportunity to easily and enthusiastically cross heretofore closely guarded disciplinary boundaries."

Not just scholars, but anyone interested in the topic under discussion. Constructive criticism from interested outsiders may be as useful as anything contributed by scholars who are too deeply involved in the matter to spot some flaws. Academic publications are not a good forum for wide-ranging debate, as journals and other publications are generally unavailable to those without access to a university library, and the style in which articles are written usually excludes all but those already knowledgeable about the discipline. Mind you, as Puchalsky says, the very accessibility of blogs leaves them open to abuse. 

	

		Posted by:
		[sarah](http://cinereous.nlogspot.com) |
		[Sunday, 10 December 2006 at 05:40 AM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/05/another\_mla\_pan.html?cid=26371978#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00d834cd4bb253ef)

		

        