## Received Wisdom: Empson and the New Critics

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/11/received_wisdom.html
 * Monday, November 20, 2006



			

(_x-posted from [The Valve](http://www.thevalve.org/go/valve/article/received\_wisdom\_empson\_and\_the\_new\_critics/)_)

[Article #1](http://www.timesonline.co.uk/newspaper/0,,2774-2454013,00.html):

In the 1950s, the New Criticism, championed by F.R.
Leavis, I.A. Richards and, ironically, the troilistically inclined
Empson, was the dominant literary ideology. This insisted that the text
and only the text mattered; the life was nothing. Subsequently,
literary theories such as structuralism went further, claiming there
was no such thing as an author; texts were written by the culture, not
the individual.

[Article #2](http://www.lrb.co.uk/v28/n22/kerm01\_.html):

So it was with what he called the Wimsatt Law, which
maintained that the intention of an author should be of no concern to
the interpreter; if the poet succeeded, all the relevant evidence of
intention was there in the poem. Wimsatt regarded the poem as a ‘verbal
icon’: an autonomous verbal structure, an aesthetic object independent
of the truth or morality of whatever it says.  This places Wimsatt on
the Richards side of the argument with Empson, who found the Wimsatt
Law disgusting: it violated his strongly Romantic notion of what poetry
is and does; and he thought he saw that the entire profession of
literary criticism, on both sides of the Atlantic, had been corrupted
by it.

Which is the correct account of Empson’s relation to the New Criticism? 

		

					[]()
			

The author of the _Times_ article—not to mention people who have or desire employment in an English department—should read Mark Jancovich’s [_The Cultural Politics of New Criticism_](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0521034841/diesekoschmar-20).  For once, the Amazon description of an academic book is pithy and cogent:

In this book, Mark Jancovich concentrates on the works
of three leading American writers—Robert Penn Warren, John Crowe Ransom
and Allen Tate—in order to examine the development of the New Criticism
during the late 1920s and early 1930s, and its establishment within the
academy in the late 1930s and 1940s. This critical movement managed to
transform the teaching and study of English through a series of essays
published in journals such as the _Southern Review_ and the _Kenyon Review_.
Jancovich argues that the New Criticism was not an example of bourgeois
individualism, as previously held, but that it sprang from a critique
of modern capitalist society developed by pre-capitalist classes within
the American South. In the process, he clarifies the distinctions
between the aims of these three Southern poets from those of the next
“generation” of New Critics such as Cleanth Brooks, Warren and Welleck,
and Wimsatt and Beardsley. He also claims that the failure on the part
of most contemporary critics to identify the movement’s ideological
origins and aims has usually meant that these critics continue to
operate within the very professional terms of reference established
through the New Critical transformations of the academy.

Empson and Richards don’t factor largely in Jancovich’s account, which
is my point—the term “New Criticism” transforms all literary
scholarship written before 1968 into a caricature of second generation
of American New Critics.  Much of what passes for the “political” in
literary scholarship relies on the contradistinction between the
current face of literary studies and that caricature.  I share with
those who [commented](http://www.thevalve.org/go/valve/article/bruce\_robbins\_on\_michael\_berube/#comments) on Bruce Robbin’s review of the [Bérubé](http://www.michaelberube.com/) the belief that literary studies tilts left for _some_ reason—but “not being a New Critic” isn’t it.

(I wrote [a similar encomium](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/08/proselytical\_gl.html) last August.  Ignore the post and dash to [the comments](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/08/proselytical\_gl.html#comment-21298414), [in which](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/08/proselytical\_gl.html#comment-21299184), [this idea](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/08/proselytical\_gl.html#comment-21307306) [acquired](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/08/proselytical\_gl.html#comment-21319618) much-needed [refinement](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/08/proselytical\_gl.html#comment-21359793)[.)] ()

			
