## What Only the Headless Have the Brains to Say...

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/04/what_only_the_h.html
 * Tuesday, April 11, 2006



I've read countless [congratulatory responses](http://www.feministe.us/blog/archives/2006/04/11/dont-jump-to-conclusions-lets-just-wait-and-see-if-omg-shes-a-liar-just-like-tawana-brawley-lets-prosecute-her-right-now/#comment-39648) to statements by the Duke Lacrosse team's counsel that there was no conclusive DNA match and I agree:

The _possibility_ that this particular African-American woman
lied proves how rarely women are raped (unless they're asking for it)
and that race and class are no longer salient issues in this Great
Egalitarian Experiment called America.  If liberals would stop
complaining about exaggerated race- and class-based inequality, these
people would stop lying to drum up sympathy for their entirely affected
sufferings. 

		

					[]()
			

**Addendum:** 

Eighteen angry emails re-re-re-re-convinced me that sarcasm doesn't fly on the internet.  

Is it ironic or merely pathetic that as soon as I started to improve
"the look" of this blog the substance went to shit?  Is there some
greater lesson to be learned here?  Should I stop shaving and showering
and concentrate on my message?  Should I shun irons and all things
starched in favor of jeans as worn as I feel?  Should I turn this into
a forum for elaborate expressions of my pain?  I'm loath to take such
measures intentionally; but I seem to've done so anyway.

Is is that blogs only positively contribute to people's lives when
those lives cut through the rapids instead of drowning in them?  Does
difficulty necessarily entail SSI and demented bunnies or am I in a
funk?  And if so why can't I be funky and funny?  'Cause I was never
funnier than when I thought I thought I'd be dead in a month.  

My humor turned mordant, certainly, but as my condition worsened my
wit sharpened.  Many people noted it without understanding its
etiology.  Not that I want to re-live that nightmare; only that I
wonder why I don't react defensively now as I did then.  Why am I
suddenly overwhelmed by pathetic high school insecurities?  Is it
simply because I was rightfully scolded for my infractions?  Am I
reviving memories of treads 'cross cheeks because I know I deserve 'em
this time?  

More to point, will I have to rewrite this addendum tomorrow in some humorous fashion because I feel like I've whined my way through that which should've stood silently in defense of itself?  And if I do . . . will I be able to muster a more amusing acronym (not to mention antecedent) than [SSI](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/04/im\_in\_trouble\_w.html)?    

			

* * *

### 9 Comments 

		

                
[]()

	

		![Jeremy Seip](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/17-50si.gif)
	

	

		

For what it's worth, I thought the scarcasm was pretty plain.  Given what I've read in your blog, the message could not have matched the form.    

	

		Posted by:
		Jeremy Seip |
		[Tuesday, 11 April 2006 at 10:52 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/04/what\_only\_the\_h.html?cid=16080993#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00d834b7ac2569e2)

[]()

	

		![Tanya Anderson](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/15-50si.gif)
	

	

		

(This will be my introductory comment as a longtime reader of your blog.)

I simply felt the need to point out that, from my perspective, for any frequent reader of this blog, the use of sarcasm was more than obvious -- although I understand your justification, I would argue that the authors of those (eighteen angry) e-mails are the one that should question their interpretative skills, and such a justification was not required /per se/. I, for one, actually laughed aloud upon reading the original post. Further, would the use of sarcasm not imply a critique of these "congratulatory responses," thus making any attacks directed towards your post misled?

(Parenthetically, speaking of e-mails, did you receive the one I sent yesterday?)

	

		Posted by:
		Tanya Anderson |
		[Wednesday, 12 April 2006 at 12:23 AM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/04/what\_only\_the\_h.html?cid=16082710#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00d834b7a80b69e2)

[]()

	

		![Tanya Anderson](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/15-50si.gif)
	

	

		

As I know that some of the readers of this blog are literature students, I must note that, my mother tongue being French, I tend to make a few mistakes now and then; for all upcoming mistakes in my use of English, I apologize in advance. (Rectification of my first comment: "[...] I would argue that the authors of those (eighteen angry) e-mails are the ones that should question their interpretative skills [...]")

	

		Posted by:
		Tanya Anderson |
		[Wednesday, 12 April 2006 at 12:27 AM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/04/what\_only\_the\_h.html?cid=16082783#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00d834b7afb969e2)

[]()

	

		![N. Pepperell](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/12-50si.gif)
	

	

		

I had no problem interpreting the post - but sarcasm is always something that requires a context to "hear" and, on the internet, it's easy to attract drive-by readers who aren't familiar enough with your site just judge the meaning of a post, and who don't seem to share the notion that they should perhaps read a bit before opening fire...

It doesn't help that, somewhere on the internet, there will inevitably be someone saying, with absolute sincerity, exactly what someone else is trying to write as an over-the-top critical parody...

	

		Posted by:
		[N. Pepperell](http://www.roughtheory.org) |
		[Wednesday, 12 April 2006 at 01:24 AM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/04/what\_only\_the\_h.html?cid=16083536#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00d834b7ab9069e2)

[]()

	

		![Tanya Anderson](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/15-50si.gif)
	

	

		

Of course, I didn't mean my comments regarding the people who wrote the aforementioned e-mails to come off as insulting or disrespectful -- I rather meant to suggest that Scott shouldn't necessarily feel guilty about having written that post, since, perhaps, those people /should/ have familiarized themselves with the general content of the blog before contemplating the idea of sending an angry e-mail, supposing that the tone of these messages was indeed "angry." That said, this assertation is potentially (almost ethically) judgmental of me.

Yet, what N. points out in the last paragraph of her comment is essentially true, and I had a similar experience with an old blog of mine, where I had written a ridiculously sarcastic parody of ethnic essentialism which generated what I would almost be willing to qualify as "hate mail." And even though I saw the post as obviously sarcastic, the feeling I got when received these messages led me think that I shouldn't have assumed that the use of sarcasm was so obvious.

	

		Posted by:
		Tanya Anderson |
		[Wednesday, 12 April 2006 at 02:08 AM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/04/what\_only\_the\_h.html?cid=16084051#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00d834b7ad3669e2)

[]()

	

		![Michael Bywater](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/02-50si.gif)
	

	

		

You've done two things, both valuable: (a) deployed satire, which there's precious little of on this medium, and (b) flushed out some New Puritans, always ready to produce the infantile response of being affronted. (Isn't "inappropriate" the most weaselly of words in contemporary usage?)

Two exemplars pop into my "mind".  The first is Randy Newman, who narrows the ironic distance between author and narrator to approximately zero (e.g. "Christmas in Cape Town") and who got slaughtered for writing "Short People", a superbly poised insult to racism widely interpreted as Shortism.  And the second is, of course, Swift.

Swift - for example in "A Modest Proposal" - raises some interesting questions about sarcasm and irony. When I first read it (as opposed to talking about it) I was struck by just how little textual evidence of irony it offered. It would be perfectly possible to read it dead straight, unless one was aware of, or made assumptions about, Swift's own moral & ethical position and the contemporary mise-en-scene.  (Hearken up, Derrida. Woo-hoo!, New Historicists.)

If you can't do the context, and you lack the imagination to make the assumptions about the author, you are of course going to be wildly affronted because _you will base your reading on your own preconceptions_. In which, as ever, the (New) Puritans reveal more about their own (anxiously unreconstructed) selves than about their interlocutors.

Bah. The blogosphere is pervaded by people who can't write addressing people who can't read. Altering - as you've done = the first term in the equation won't alter the second. (So it's not an equation. (Insert obligatory critical theory to taste.))

	

		Posted by:
		[Michael Bywater](http://hermeneutics.typepad.com) |
		[Wednesday, 12 April 2006 at 06:34 AM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/04/what\_only\_the\_h.html?cid=16088211#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00d83482431553ef)

[]()

	

		![Rich Puchalsky](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/15-50si.gif)
	

	

		

Hmm -- "deployed satire, which there's precious little of on this medium"?  With all due respect to Michael, that's worse than an SSI, which is at least limited to a single person.  The form of satire in which one writes a wingnut paragraph and relies on the context of it being on a non-wingnut blog in order to make it into satire is not rare.  Michael can write something back about sense of humor and so on, but to me at least Swift's Modest Proposal would not have been great satire if there really had been pamphleteers of the time already writing about how we should eat Irish babies.  Writing that we should go ahead with a nuclear first strike on Iran in order to save civilization -- that would be sort of intrinsically dark humor, perhaps, but not really good satire at this point.

As for the rest, people routinely misinterpret tone over the Internet.  There was some recent study that I don't even feel like Googling that said that 50%!o(MISSING)f the time people misinterpreted the tone of a statement that the writer thought would be obvious.  So you can't really blame the reader.  You have to either write this kind of thing expecting angry Emails or resign yourself to putting in a statement at the end explicitly labeling it as satire.

I should have saved space by just agreeing with N. Pepperell's second paragraph.

	

		Posted by:
		Rich Puchalsky |
		[Wednesday, 12 April 2006 at 08:32 AM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/04/what\_only\_the\_h.html?cid=16091275#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00d834b7b88f69e2)

[]()

	

		![Lauren](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/07-50si.gif)
	

	

		

I blame the 
patriarchy
 readers.

	

		Posted by:
		[Lauren](http://feministe.us/blog/) |
		[Thursday, 13 April 2006 at 10:22 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/04/what\_only\_the\_h.html?cid=16156212#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00d83482ad1f53ef)

[]()

	

		![Lauren](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/07-50si.gif)
	

	

		

Aw hell, my strike didn't work.

	

		Posted by:
		[Lauren](http://feministe.us/blog/) |
		[Thursday, 13 April 2006 at 10:22 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/04/what\_only\_the\_h.html?cid=16156226#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00d834b819cf69e2)

		

        