## The Trouble With Diversity: Cultural or Neurolinguistic Uniqueness?

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/10/the_trouble_wit_3.html
 * Wednesday, October 04, 2006



[_Post inspired by [a recent exchange](http://www.unfogged.com/cgi-sys/cgiwrap/unfogged/managed-mt/mt-comments.cgi?entry\_id=5534) on [Unfogged](http://www.unfogged.com/)_ _and x-posted from [the Valve](http://www.thevalve.org/go/valve/article/the\_trouble\_with\_diversity\_cultural\_or\_neurolinguistic\_uniqueness/)._]

**I. Preserving Cultural Uniqueness**

On its face, the most salient criticism of Michaels’ discussion of
language extinction invokes the idea that every language offers a
unique perspective on the world—a perspective which is, if lost,
irrevocably so.  The weak form of this criticism insists that
categories embedded in a given language tell us something about the
ideology of its speakers.  The most common example comes not from an
endangered language, however, but from one spoken by 75,500,000 people:
Javenese.  Theoretically, Javanese speakers move between these
registers based on their social status relative to that of their
interlocutor.[

[1]

](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/10/the\_trouble\_wit\_3.html#1)
If Javanese died, so too would intimate knowledge of the worldview it
afforded its speakers.  Despite myself, I’m sympathetic to this
argument: linguists can learn more about a living language and its
relation to the society of its speakers than they can infer from a dead
one.  

But once a language has been thoroughly studied, what _necessary_
investment should anyone have in keeping it alive?  Many would answer
“Because its life entails the cultural life of its speakers and their
unique way of looking at the world.” Fair enough.  Only what if we find
its uniqueness morally repugnant?  What if the perspective it preserves
is violently misogynistic?  I take this to be the point of Michaels’
hypothetical culture of American segregationists:

		

					[]()
			

				What if American segregationists had described
themselves as participating in a culture of segregation and had said
... that they didn’t, of course, claim that segregation was good for
everyone but they did claim it was good for them and that their culture
had a right to survive. (153)

If they spoke a language all their own—a Southerner with relatives
throughout rural Mississippi might even say they do—and still practiced
segregation, claims that their culture deserved preservation on account
of its uniqueness would be rare.  Once linguists finished cataloguing
the humilifics used to identity African-American skin-tone, most
everyone _except for the segregationists_
would call for the destruction of that culture, its uniqueness be
damned.  The moral imperative to preserve different cultures, I would
argue, genuflects both to the pernicious myth of Western superiority
and that of the noble savage: 

“_Our_ lives can be enriched by _your_ perspective, so we’re gonna send in the 51

st

 Fightin’ Wordhordes to make sure you don’t go and die before doing us this good turn."

I think Michaels is right to link the persistence of culture to
something more “ought” than “is.” That is, I think such conversations
threaten to tumble into abstractions instead of specifics; which result
I find strange, since the specifics of a language are what attract
linguists to it.[

[2]

](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/10/the\_trouble\_wit\_3.html#2)

**II.  Preserving Biological Uniqueness**

Then I had another thought: What if the uniqueness of a language was
more than cultural—what if it was biological?  What if the loss of a
language didn’t entail the loss of a cultural perspective on the world
but a neurolinguistic steady state, one which would not only be lost
but which could never be duplicated?  So I dug around and discovered
some recent, but by no means definitive, papers on the topic.

M. Chee, C. S. Soon and H.L. Lee’s “Common and Segregated Neuronal
Networks for Different Languages Revealed Using Functional Magnetic
Resonance Adaptation” (_Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience_ 15.1, 2003) initially seemed promising:

that common, specialized areas for language exist at a
macroscopic level. Intuitively, it seems probable that at a
finergrained level, distinct neuronal networks are involved in
processing different languages. However, it is presently unclear if
conventional functional neuroimaging techniques have the capability of
demonstrating these finergrained distinctions in functional
specialization.

That “intuitively” worried me, as did the implication that they would
continue to refine their tools and search until they find evidence
validating their “intuition.” Mostly, though, the article disappoints
because it draws no conclusion ... and because it seems like the
researchers have hammer, will travel.  I’m sure neuroimaging technology
will eventually deliver fields, nay, _steppes_ of accomodating nails.  

D. Perani and J. Abutalebi’s “The Neural Basis of First and Second Language Processing” (_Current Opinion in Neurobiology_ 15.2, 2005) dashed my hopes:

The most important contribution of brain imaging studies
to the neurobiology of language in bilinguals is the observation of
both invariance and plasticity. First, concerning language acquisition,
[Language #2] seems to be acquired through the same neural devices
responsible for [Language #1] acquisition. Second, regarding L2
processing, the patterns of brain activation associated with tasks that
engage specific aspects of linguistic processing are remarkably
consistent among different languages, which share the same brain
language system. These relatively fixed brain patterns, however, are
modulated by several factors. Proficiency, age of acquisition, and
amount of exposure can affect the cerebral representations of each
language, interacting in a complex way with the modalities of language
performance. Future studies disentangling the different language
processes should always take into account these potentially important
variables.

Different cultures don’t process language—or the world _through_
language—differently.  People who acquire second languages earlier or
later in life do, but everyone acquires the first one through the same
pathways.[

[3]

](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/10/the\_trouble\_wit\_3.html#3)
So it seems the imperative to preserve unique brain patterns extends to
individuals but not cultures.  I only read seven or eight articles
though, and I’m not nearly so deft a science database-wrangler as a
humanities, so I likely missed some fairly obvious material.  The
undergraduate linguist in me finds this material endlessly fascinating,
so recommend away, my little Tube Elves, and I’ll do my homework.[

[4]

](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/10/the\_trouble\_wit\_3.html#4)

 

* * *

  
[

1

]() I qualify here because most Javanese speakers only know the informal and polite registers.


[

2

]() This analysis ignores the fact that languages don’t burn off nearly so much as they fade 
away
 _into_, as Timothy Burke [argues](http://www.unfogged.com/cgi-sys/cgiwrap/unfogged/managed-mt/mt-comments.cgi?entry\_id=5534#416470):

In the longue duree of human history, languages change,
get absorbed into others and die out all the time. Does that make the
linguistic history of humanity a case of endless tragedy? An endless
compendium of resources lost to the linguist, and nothing more? It’s as
if one set out to say all extinction of all kinds at all moments in the
history of life on Earth is a bad thing because any extinction at any
moment removed some small, crucial piece of existing biodiversity at
that moment. If that’s true, then evolution itself is a bad thing; the
price of new species is extinction. The price of linguistic variety and
the expressive range of language is that some languages change, some
languages combine, and some cease to exist.

So to get particularly upset about languages disappearing today
takes more than just being upset about the phenomenon of languages
disappearing. The phenomenon is at a minimal morally neutral; I’d go
further and say it’s a positive good, because it is part and parcel of
what makes human language the powerful, changing instrument that it is.

To be upset by a language disappearing (or a species going extinct),
you need to offer an argument that a given language in the here and now
is disappearing for reasons which are abnormal in the history of
linguistic evolution. That’s an argument you can make in biological
evolution pretty successfully, that we’re in the middle of an
“extinction event” and that those periods, while broadly normal in the
history of life, are nevertheless pretty negative in their impact on
life forms existing during such events, and also, such events are
different in scale and character than “ordinary” extinction.

I’m not sure you can make a precisely similar argument about
languages. Linguistic change in human history often has a lot to do
with major dislocations or disjunctures in human society: migration,
war, environmental catastrophe, colonialization, cultural frontiers,
changing family or kinship patterns, new trade opportunities. The
present is bigger in scale, but not different in type. Especially if it
turns out that globalization doesn’t produce in any simple way
homogenization, if underneath it all, the drive to diversify and
differentiate languages is as strong as ever.

[

3

]() Except for me, but I’m a legitimate exception.  So say the [things I’m scribbling](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/05/those\_who\_can\_d.html) in my spare time.  

[

4

]()
“Tube Elves” being the Kaufman household’s new name for people who
email me things they think I ought to read.  They first appeared last
night, when my stumped wife stumped me on some nicety of literary
theory we both should’ve known.  I offered to “have my elves scour the
tubes” for the answer.  

“Your _elves_?”

“Yes,” I replied, “my _elves_.”

“Your _tube_ elves?”

“I guess you could call them that.”

“How does that work?”

“I’m not sure, but I think the third step’s '[Profit](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Underpants\_Gnomes#The\_gnomes).'”

			

* * *

### 4 Comments 

		

                
[]()

	

		![Brian](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/14-50si.gif)
	

	

		

Well, this is just an (educated) guess, but I seriously doubt you are going to find what you are looking for here.  Not because nothing of the sort exists, but rather because the level of uniqueness in “brain state” that would be required to differentiate one language from another would, I believe, be so small as to be far beyond resolution of any fMRI scan available today, and possibly any scanner conceivable.  When I read the sentence:

_However, it is presently unclear if conventional functional neuroimaging techniques have the capability of demonstrating these finegrained distinctions in functional specialization._

I translate it in my head as:

_No way in hell we could ever hope to measure something like this in a brain scan._

Not to mention the controls one would need to run are presently staggering my imagination, and I don’t work in this field, so it’s probably even worse than I think.

Your point about individuals v. cultures is apt – I don’t think anyone would be able to separate individual differences from cultural difference in a scanner.

Frankly, I have a hard time believing that the kind of subtle differences needed to overcome Burke’s argument exist at all, let alone that they might be detectable by fMRI, or any subsequent technology.

	

		Posted by:
		Brian |
		[Thursday, 05 October 2006 at 01:17 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/10/the\_trouble\_wit\_3.html?cid=23452510#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00d834eedb0d69e2)

[]()

	

		![David R. Block](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/18-50si.gif)
	

	

		

There are also PET scans (Positron Emission Tomography) which are proving promising at diagnosing Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder, but I don't know if they do anything for language. 

	

		Posted by:
		David R. Block |
		[Thursday, 05 October 2006 at 02:38 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/10/the\_trouble\_wit\_3.html?cid=23456738#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00d834b9797653ef)

[]()

	

		![Kevin](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/01-50si.gif)
	

	

		

"linguists can learn more about a living language and its relation to the society of its speakers than they can infer from a dead one."

Does this mean philology sucks? 

	

		Posted by:
		Kevin |
		[Thursday, 05 October 2006 at 06:40 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/10/the\_trouble\_wit\_3.html?cid=23467383#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00d834eee77c69e2)

[]()

	

		![Terry](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/14-50si.gif)
	

	

		

This may be of interest: [http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/13560741/](http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/13560741/)

In brief - language may affect what parts of the brain that are used to solve simple arithmatic (it's hard to control for culture in these experiments). If true, the "experience of math" for Chinese and English speakers may be different in a limited but fundamental way.

	

		Posted by:
		[Terry](http://tdj.livejournal.com) |
		[Thursday, 05 October 2006 at 10:53 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/10/the\_trouble\_wit\_3.html?cid=23474710#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00d834b9927853ef)

		

        