## Reverse-Engineering Other People's Prompts: A Contest

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/12/reverseengineer.html
 * Sunday, December 17, 2006



(_x-posted to [the Valve](http://www.thevalve.org/go/valve/article/reverse\_engineering\_prompts\_a\_contest/)_ )

The following searches brought potential plagiarists to [Acephalous](http://acephalous.typepd.com/) the last two weeks.  What do you think the prompts prompting their searches looked like?  Consider, for example:

“[Is Tyler Durden a masculine character](http://www.google.com/search?num=100&hl=en&lr=lang\_en&safe=off&q=is+tyler+durden+masculine+character&btnG=Search)?"

[_Really?_](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00003W8NM/diesekoschmar-20)  Someone needed Google to answer _that?_  I find it difficult to imagine the motivating prompt:

Is the central character in a novel epitomizing the
compensatory masculinity of “a generation of men raised by women”
really all that masculine?  Your answer should take the form of a “Yes”
or a “No.” Students choosing the latter must also identify the occupant
of Grant’s Tomb.  Failure to do so correctly will result in my friends
and I reconsidering our position on compulsory sterilization.

Some searches resist identification by virtue of their excessive generality, like the one demanding Google produce a “[good reading [of] ode on a grecian urn](http://www.google.com/search?q=%!o(MISSING)de+on+a+grecian+urn%!+(MISSING)good+reading+of).”  Do such searches betray the desperation of a beleaguered and waning faith in student intellection?  

Over the course of the semester, your profound ignorance
of history, literature, culture and the fundaments of English grammar
convinced me that anything resembling an argument written in anything
approximating standard English is almost too much to ask.  I would no
more entrust you with a sentence than a baby with a machete, but as an
oral exam would remind me that you exist outside the nightmare my
therapist recommended I consider the fifty minutes I spend with you
demons three times a week, I have no choice but to suggest someone else
write your paper for you.  Straight plagiarism is preferred, since your
transparent paraphrases will only force me to spend ten seconds
resenting everyone who decided the world would be a better place if no
one strangled you.

Then there are the students who leach the fun from this contest by including the prompt in their search, _e.g._

“[What
are the elements of our personality? Which of these elements are the
result your heredity and which are the results of your environment? Was
nature or nurture more important in your development? How did you
become the person you are? _**free sample essays**_](http://www.google.com/search?hl=en&lr=&q=what+are+the+elements+of+our+personality%!F(MISSING)+which+of+these+elements+are+the+result+your+heredity+and+which+are+the+results+of+your+environment%!F(MISSING)+was+nature+or+nurture+more+important+in+your+development%!F(MISSING)+how+did+you+become+the+person+you+are%!F(MISSING)+free+sample+essays&btnG=Search)."

That search inspired me one of my own:

[What
is social darwinism? Did it really exist? Or did people believe in
different evolutionary theories, like those of Lamarck? Were they aware
that they did, or did they think they were good Darwinians? _**free sample essays**_](http://www.google.com/search?q=what+is+social+darwinism%!F(MISSING)+did+it+really+exist%!F(MISSING)+or+did+people+believe+in+different+evolutionary+theories%!C(MISSING)+like+those+of+lamarck%!F(MISSING)+were+they+aware+that+they+did%!C(MISSING)+or+did+they+think+they+were+good+Darwinians+free+sample+essays)

Sadly, [I’m one of the only people](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/03/the\_best\_quotat.html)
capable of answering those questions.  But enough about me.  What
prompts do you think compelled savvy undergraduates to venture the
following searches?

1.  “[Chiasmus?  Examples of in [_The_] _Crying of Lot 49_](http://www.google.com/search?hl=en&lr=&q=Chiasmus+examples+in+Crying+of+lot+49)?"2.  “[What does biology have to do when you have a chemist botanical gardener kicking your ass](http://www.google.com/search?l=en&q=What+does+biology+have+to+do+when+you+have+a+chemist+botanical+gardener+kicking+your+ass)?"3.  “[Corey Haim’s comment [about] Darwin was](http://www.google.com/search?hl=en&q=Corey+Haim%!s(MISSING)+comment+of+Darwin+was)?"4.  “[[What] academic experiments [have been] done on fish with controlling pills](http://www.google.ca/search?hl=en&q=academic+essays+on+experiments+done+on++fish%!s(MISSING)+with+controlling+pills&meta=)?"5.  “[How [do you] cite a blurb [in] MLA [style]](http://www.google.com/search?hl=en&lr=&client=firefox-a&rls=org.mozilla%!A(MISSING)en-US%!A(MISSING)official&hs=VY3&q=how+to+cite+a+blurb+mla&btnG=Search)?"
		

* * *

### 2 Comments 

		

                
[]()

	

		![History Geek](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/07-50si.gif)
	

	

		

I have people coming to my blog with things like:

[if women had writen stories, they would have written of men more wikkednesse than all the sex of Adam may redresse](http://www.google.ca/search?hl=en&q=if%!w(MISSING)omen%!h(MISSING)ad%!w(MISSING)riten%!s(MISSING)tories%!C(MISSING)%!t(MISSING)hey%!w(MISSING)ould%!h(MISSING)ave%!w(MISSING)ritten%!o(MISSING)f%!m(MISSING)en%!m(MISSING)ore%!w(MISSING)ikkednesse%!t(MISSING)han%!a(MISSING)ll%!t(MISSING)he%!s(MISSING)ex%!o(MISSING)f%!A(MISSING)dam%!m(MISSING)ay%!r(MISSING)edresse&btnG=Search&meta=) (I get quite a few of these)

[the wife of bath, anti-feminist?](http://www.google.ie/search?hl=en&q=the%!w(MISSING)ife%!o(MISSING)f%!b(MISSING)ath%!C(MISSING)%!a(MISSING)nti-feminist%!F(MISSING)&meta=)

And my favotire someone looking to [Lerne about evil](http://www.google.ca/search?hl=fr&q=lerne%!a(MISSING)bout%!e(MISSING)vil&btnG=Rechercher&meta=). 

At least I haven't had any more of those Tom Leykis naked hits lately.   

	

		Posted by:
		[History Geek](http://history-speaks.blogspot.com/) |
		[Tuesday, 19 December 2006 at 08:49 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/12/reverseengineer.html?cid=26777678#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00d834d0a5fc53ef)

[]()

	

		![Karl Steel](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/07-50si.gif)
	

	

		

Aagh! I love this post. I don't have the energy, or the talent, to come up with something sufficiently funny. But surely your readers do? Why have they failed you?

	

		Posted by:
		Karl Steel |
		[Thursday, 21 December 2006 at 12:30 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/12/reverseengineer.html?cid=26841649#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00d834d116a353ef)

		

        