## "Classic" <em>Acephalous</em>: You Make Me Uncomfortable with Your Words and What You Say

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2007/10/classic-acephal.html
 * Tuesday, October 30, 2007



A _slightly_ redacted version of my favorite student complaint ever:
My Teacher,I
appreciate you taking your inconvenience to instruct us but I really
had some problems in your class and I would like to explain them to you
now.  Every day I wanted to discuss with you about the way you grade my
papers and the way you teach the class, but I could not because the
things you say in class and your words disturb me so much I can not. 
You make me completely uncomfortable with the little things you say in
the class like how you talk about television or how you talk about when
you are grading our papers and trying to be fair.  You do not seem to
care about our grades only that they are up to your too high standards
and I can not talk to you because you make me completely
uncomfortable.  For example, you say you will talk to us about our
grades but you really will not because of how uncomfortable you make me
feel with your words and what you say.

I will plan to contest the grade you have given me in this class
when I get it because I know it will be much higher with any other
teacher.  I am a very religious man and you are not a bad person but
you do not choose your words with enough care like a teacher should. 
You try to be objective and the very attempt becomes your flaw because
you try so hard to grade fairly and comment wisely that you become
biased to your own ideas.  You criticize our writings because we are
college students and young but do not realize that you offend most of
us when you do this.  I am always offended when I go to your class and
have been on many occasions but I never tell you of my offense because
you make me completely uncomfortable so I never say a word.

You like to lead discussions and that is bad because it is the
entire means by which we learn but we do not know what you want from us
on our papers.   I have honestly no idea what I learned from you in
this class because so much time was spent discussing the tiny details
in the passages in the book and so if I learned anything it is how to
read things in too much detail.  I could have read books in too much
detail on my own but that is not what I came to college to do because I
already know how to read and I would have told you this but you make me
completely uncomfortable with your words so I never said a word.

By doing this you give us no guidance on our papers.  I thought it
was lame that you decided to show a movie and a cop out because you
chose not to give us any instruction.  I know that it was a movie based
on the story in the play we read but it was not teaching to show it to
us when you could have been teaching us to write what you wanted us to
write on our papers instead.  The movie was completely racist and very
offensive because it contained cultural stereotypes that are often used
in disrespectful jokes about people who have their feelings hurt all
the time.  I was offended by this racism and in the movie and had my
feelings hurt by it.  If that was supposed to teach me something about
the class I completely do not understand.

After this quarter I am hurt and tired and feel like talking to you
now will do me no good.  I wanted to go to your office hours but I
could not find the time or make myself because of your words.  I feel
like my paper was written to the best of my ability in reference to
your teaching skills in the discussions.  You grade my papers poorly
but do not realize that you do so because they reflect your teaching
skills.  Other people may have done well with your skills but I did not
and would have talked to you but what you said about grading fairly
made me uncomfortable.  I take my responsibilities as a man and I have
never complained about my grades but this one I will because I did not
need you to teach me how to read or to write.  I have made very high
grades in all my other writing classes and even though I had many
disputes with those instructors we always settled them to my
happiness.  Now for the first time I can not talk to you to settle my
grades because I am uncomfortable to talk or even write to you.  I
should have stayed strong and like a man no matter how much your words
and what you said offended me.  I do not blame you because when there
is error there are two to blame, the perceiver and the target.  I do
not know what this email does but I have to get my feelings off of my
chest.  Thank you for reading this and I am sorry if what I feel has
shown you disrespect but these are my feelings and I feel by your words
you did not respect them.  I love everyone and believe you to possibly
be a great person but with your words you have treated me completely
unfairly.

I am a very religious man and I love every one but I will forward
this letter to the head of your department so he can see that I am a
serious student who does not deserve the grade you will give him
because I write so very well.

(_Note: Complaints concerning the violation of student-teacher trust have been discussed in detail both on [the original thread](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2007/03/and\_yet\_i\_still.html) and [a subsequent one](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2007/03/i\_am\_making\_peo.html)._)

		

* * *

### 1 Comment 

		

                
[]()

	

		![Timothy Scriven](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/12-50si.gif)
	

	

		

Part of the problem is perhaps the sense of entitlement grade inflation brings in the US. In Australia the average grade seems to be a credit ( 65%) across the nation which I believe is different from the American system. For a variety of reasons this means that there is far more room for criticism and students learn to take a more realistic approach to assesment.

	

		Posted by:
		Timothy Scriven |
		[Saturday, 03 November 2007 at 11:38 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2007/10/classic-acephal.html?cid=88658050#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00e54f7957268833)

		

        