## Thought-in-Process: Wharton's "The Descent of Man," Part II

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2007/06/thought-in-pr-4.html
 * Friday, June 22, 2007



(_Previous installments: [Part I](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2007/06/thought-in-pr-3.html)_ )

Many works of pseudo-scientific synthesis were popular.  As Linyard
thinks to himself: "Every one now read scientific books and expressed
an opinion on them ... the inaccessible goddess whom the Professor had
served in his youth now offered her charm to the market-place" (314). 
And yet, he counters, "it was not the same goddess after all, but a
pseudo-science masquerading in the garb of the real divinity."  Wharton
undercuts Linyard here: science is the goddess most worthy of worship
transforms science into a religion, at least in the mind of Linyard. 
His perspective on scientific inquiry is skewed, which may be why his
idea is mistaken for the very pseudo-science it mocks; namely, works in
which "ancient dogma and modern discovery were depicted in a close
embrace under the lime-lights of a hazy transcendentalism" (315).  As
to his idea, 
the divine, incomparable idea was simply that he should avenge his goddess by satirizing her false
interpreters. He would write a skit on the "popular" scientific book;
he would so heap platitude on platitude, fallacy on fallacy, false
analogy on false analogy, so use his superior knowledge to abound in
the sense of the ignorant, that even the gross crowd would join in the
laugh against its augurs. And the laugh should be something more than
the distension of mental muscles; it should be the trumpet-blast
bringing down the walls of ignorance, or at least the little stone
striking the giant between the eyes. (315)

Wharton _may_ be
suggesting that his ability to pull this off is marred by the
pseudo-scientific quality of his "superior knowledge."  At this time,
the disciplines had yet to coalesce into the neat units
interdisciplinarians now smash: biology, psychology, sociology,
literature, philosophy, botany, you name a department and William James
taught the exact same course on Herbert Spencer in it.  When Linyard
pitches his manuscript to an old college friend in publishing, Harviss
initially considers even reading the manuscript a favor.  When he reads
it and mistakenly believes Linyard to "have come round a little—have
fallen in line" (316), he immediately orders the publication of _The Vital Thing_. 
Linyard returns a fortnight later, and upon learning that it will be
published as the very thing it mocks, he laughs himself into a whirl,
recovers, then "succomb[s] to a fresh access, from the vortex of which
he managed to fling out" (317).

Once Harviss recovers from his flushes of embarrassment, he proposes
that Linyard not "insist on an ironical interpretation [addressed] to a
very small class of readers," that "if you'll let me handle this book
as a genuine thing I'll guarantee to make it go" (317).  Linyard
accedes, charmed by "the enlarged circumference of the joke" (317). 
Here, then, is another possible gloss on the title: it could document
the descent of Linyard, as he puts aside his scientific qualms for
monetary gains.  Harviss offers him a $1,000 advance, no small reward
for setting aside his scruples.  That he begins to rationalize his
decision the moment he leaves Harviss' office evidences his discomfort:
"after all, nothing was changed in the situation; not a word of the
book was to be altered ... The change was merely in the publisher's
point of view" (317). 

		
