## A Pre-MLA Preview of the Annual Post-MLA Article

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2008/12/a-premla-preview-of-the-annual-postmla-article.html
 * Monday, December 22, 2008



Every year more than 10,000 literature scholars gather at the end of
December for the convention of the Modern Language Association, the
124th of which begins next week in San Fransisco.

Past conventions have yielded papers with titles that were rife with
bad puns, cute pop-culture references and an adolescent preoccupation
with sex, from “Neo-Victorian Buggery” to “Bambi as a Bottom” and the
tragically hip “I Never Got Tenure (but I Owe My Job to Jay-Z):
Capital-T Theory, Hip-Hop Culture, and Some Thoughts About the Role of
Literature in Contemporary Literary Studies.”

Founded in 1883, the Modern Language Association barely registered
on the public consciousness for its first century. Professors attended
to doze through papers about Chaucer and Emerson, schmooze one another
and lobby for posts at more prestigious campuses. But in the 1980’s the
conference became the site of annual skirmishes between old-school
traditionalists and the increasing powerful new breed of
postmodernists, multiculturalists, feminists and queer-theory
advocates.

Basking in this unaccustomed level of public notice, Modern Language
Association scholars brought increasingly attention-grabbing papers to
the convention through the 1990’s, “queering” the “canon,” some said,
and championing the “postcolonial,” proposing wild theories about
everything from comic books to hip-hop to television and movies. Last
year, perhaps hoping to put a stop to the trend, the _Chronicle of Higher Education_ announced its first Annual Awards for Self-Consciously Provocative M.L.A. Paper Titles (a k a the Provokies) but in 2004 the _Chronicle_ decided to drop the awards. Scott McLemee, a senior writer at _Inside Higher Ed_, explained that “crafting titles to get them written about and attacked in the press used to be exciting.

“Now it’s become a reflex, and their hearts aren’t really in it anymore.”

Not only are titles no longer intended to amuse, from the looks of this
year’s several thousand entries, absolutely nothing of any importance
is studied by scholars who present at the MLA.  From “‘Nabakov’s
Self-Translations” to an entire panel devoted to African literature,
these scholars embrace topics no right-thinking person cares about. 
Would Joe the Plumber attend a talk on “William Faulkner’s Rural
Modernism”?  Would Tito the Builder enjoy a twenty-minute talk on
“History and Memory in [James Joyce’s] ‘The Dead’”?  Does Joe Sixpack
even know what _PMLA_ is, much less want to be published in it?  Why then would he attend the roundtable discussion “How to Get Published in _PMLA_“? 
While most Americans never bothered to acquaint themselves with old
readings of Renaissance texts, the eggheads at the MLA insist on
producing “New Readings of Renaissance Texts.”

And there’s much, much more.  But all of it is about unimportant nonsense. 

(_[x-stitched](http://www.thevalve.org/go/valve/article/a\_pre\_mla\_preview\_of\_the\_annual\_post\_mla\_article/)_.)

		

* * *

### 2 Comments 

		

                
[]()

	

		![Karl Steel](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/03-50si.gif)
	

	

		

Okay, I haven't even read this yet, but I want to say, first, and now, BREAK A FREAKIN LEG. Metaphorically. At the MLA. Where I presume you're going.

	

		Posted by:
		[Karl Steel](http://inthemedievalmiddle.com) |
		[Tuesday, 23 December 2008 at 02:38 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2008/12/a-premla-preview-of-the-annual-postmla-article.html?cid=143372396#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef0105368f5c53970b)

[]()

	

		![Roger Walis](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/08-50si.gif)
	

	

		

There is a modern spiffier version of The Dead that Tito the Builder might appreciate: Anne Pigone's line-for-line rewrite called The Ugly. Here is an excerpt I cut and pasted off the net. 

Gabriella said nothing, but held up her hand for them to be silent, pointing off to where her husband was now accompanying the unfamiliar voice. The tune was recognizable though the singer was fumbling with the lyrics.

You're lovely, never never change, keep you breathless touch, darling please arrange it 'cause I love you...

—O, exclaimed Jan Mayer. It's Burger Bob singing and he wouldn't sing all night. Only now when everybody's gone. Isn't that ...

—Well, we're still here, said Tish. Let's go listen.

Before they got halfway over to the piano the singing and playing had stopped and Garett followed by Burger Bob and Wendy came towards them.

—That's a shame, said Eliot. We were just coming to hear you. It sounded really great.

—O, Bob and Garett, Tish chimed in. What meanies you are to stop just when we were coming to listen.

—Everyone has been after you two all night to perform, and you have made so many poor excuses, said Mayer.

—And now when there is no one to hear you...

—We weren't putting on a show, said Burger Bob curtly, while Garett merely looked the other way.

—Well if you are going to catch up with the others you had better get a move on it, said Elisabeth. And make sure you have some wraps. It's cold out there.

—Typical Colorado weather, said Tish.

—Yes, and famous it is for giving us colds, said Elisabeth

—Actually, it is not typical at all, said Giles. It's a record breaking winter. On television they say that all of the central western states are covered in at least 10 inches of snow.

They're generalizing, said Burger Bob. It's raining in Las Cruces.

—Well the snow certainly made a wonderful backdrop for the wedding, said Wendy. It couldn't have been more romantic, if you ask me.

—Bob doesn't like a lot of snow, because then people can't visit his drive-thrus, said Elisabeth, smiling.

Gabby would have given anything not to go anywhere, to just be alone with Garett, but she had promised Elisabeth to look out for Carmen and get her home safely. She wondered why Elisabeth was so concerned about Carmen whom she obviously didn't like and hardly ever spoke to. Garett stood aloof. Lost. In another world as usual. Distant Garett. Beautiful distant Garett. She went to stand beside him and took his hand.

—Bob, Tish asked, what was the name of that song you were singing?

—The way you look tonight, said Burger Bob. I thought everybody knew it.

—Yes of course, The way you look tonight, she repeated. I just couldn't think of the name.

—A classic wedding reception piece, to be sure, said Jan Mayer.

—Don't get on his case, Jan, reprimanded Giles.

They wandered together down into the lobby. Burger Bob asked the bellhop to find them a taxi.

—Well good night, Giles, and thank you for a terrific party, he said.

—Good night, Gabby. Good night Garett, and don't get into trouble at that club.

—Good night Elisabeth, it's been wonderful. What do you say Tish – not too late to join us?

—Oh, my place is here with Giles, she answered. It's good night for me.

—Good night Gabby, Wendy.

—Your shoe is untied, Garett, said Eliot.

—Thank you, Eliot, said Garett.

—Good night everybody. Don't be too late – church tomorrow, said Giles

—Good night, we love you, said Tish.

	

		Posted by:
		Roger Walis |
		[Tuesday, 23 December 2008 at 04:19 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2008/12/a-premla-preview-of-the-annual-postmla-article.html?cid=143380898#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef0105368fa34e970b)

		

        