## Can a Reading be Disproven?

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2008/03/can-a-reading-b.html
 * Tuesday, March 11, 2008



The conversation began with [Rohan Maitzen](http://maitzenreads.blogspot.com/)'s questioning [the status of "findings" in the humanities](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2008/03/i-generally-aga.html#comment-106558464), and I'll bring it back there shortly.  Right now, JPool's [response](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2008/03/i-generally-aga.html#comment-106642478) to Rich's [hypothetical](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2008/03/i-generally-aga.html#comment-106617582)—"think about what you'd have to do to show no connection between
Elizabethan architecture and the structure of Shakespeare's plays"—demands your attention:

From the _Journal of Literary Primatology_:

 **Abstract:**

Under labratory conditions three groups of infinite numbers of
monkeys (hereafter, INM) were given a corresponding infinite number of
word processors (Hamilton, et al., 2003, having shown definitively that
no overall difference in results obtained from the use of word
processors rather than typewriters) and allowed sufficient time (ST) to
reproduce all of Shakespeare's plays.

Group A were raised in a physical environment consisting of nothing
but Elizabethan architecture. Group B were raised under normal monkey
conditions, but then given intensive exposure to and instruction in the
field of Elizabethan architecture. Group C, the control group, were
allowed no exposure to Elizabethan or neo-Elizabethan architecture.

The three INM groups were monitored in real time, and their literary
output, including fragments and drafts, were compared to all of
Shakespeare's plays. At the end of ST, no disceranble difference was
present in the literary output of each INM grouping. The three grops
did produce variations on the plays' known plots and characters. For
example, Group A produced a variation on "Othello" in which Desdemona,
not actually dead, but only winded and contused, arose at the end of
the play, only to kill herself again. Group C, produced a number of
versions of "The Merchant of Venice" in which Shylock is indeed awarded
a pound of flesh, thoroughly drained of blood, and Antonio walks with a
limp for the remainder of the play. In each case, however, the INM
grouping also eventually produced the more tradtional versions of the
plays and the variations that they produced were not found to correlate
meanigfully with their exposure to Elizabethan architecture.

Based on INM Simian Modeling Theory, then, no correlation has been
found between Elizabethan architecture and Shakespeare's plays.

 

		

* * *

### 7 Comments 

		

                
[]()

	

		![JPool](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/02-50si.gif)
	

	

		

Thanks!  

It was the best thing I wrote today.  Which is sad.  Then nice.  Then sad again.

	

		Posted by:
		JPool |
		[Wednesday, 12 March 2008 at 01:28 AM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2008/03/can-a-reading-b.html?cid=106705244#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00e5510b9d408834)

[]()

	

		![Rohan Maitzen](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/04-50si.gif)
	

	

		

That was very funny--but also, sort of, not...

Perhaps the issue is that scholars in the humanities aim (or need) not to be "right" but to be interesting? A while back Amardeep Singh had an interesting post about "smart" vs. "sound" scholarship: "Rigor takes the frame of scientific proof; smart the frame of the market, which mandates interest amid a crowd of competitors. Deeming something smart, to use Kant's framework, is a judgment of taste rather than a judgment of reason. Like most judgments of taste, it is finally a measure of the people who hold it or lack it." ([The rest of his post is here.](http://www.lehigh.edu/~amsp/2004/12/smart-criticism-vs-gooduseful-academic.html))  

	

		Posted by:
		[Rohan Maitzen](http://maitzenreads.blogspot.com) |
		[Wednesday, 12 March 2008 at 07:03 AM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2008/03/can-a-reading-b.html?cid=106725702#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00e5510ec2c08834)

[]()

	

		![Luther Blissett](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/06-50si.gif)
	

	

		

It all depends on the type and level of claims made in the scholarship.  If I want to show the influence of Constance Rourke's ideas about American humor on Ishmael Reed, I can begin with Reed's bibliography to \*Mumbo Jumbo\*, where he cites Rourke's work as a source.  That gives me some pretty solid evidence.  I can certainly go wrong in assessing the extent of that influence, but the evidence and proof will be pretty clear-cut.

A close reading also has a fairly clear-cut evidence and proof situation.  If I find a pattern, I had better had proof of that pattern, etc.

Higher level humanities claims are harder to prove and impossible to disprove, once they get a grip on the field.  There are two reasons for this: first of all, no single atoms of evidence can individually disprove large-scale claims.  It's a geological process, a slow accretion of problems with the paradigm, as Kuhn might say.  Second, influential large-scale claims become part of a canon of ideas that, even when no longer seen as accurate, are seen as necessary background on an intellectual field.  (Freud's work is a great example here: it's simply necessary to read him, even if tomorrow, a neurobiologist could with complete certainty prove how the mind/brain works.)

So one question might be: should a field limit itself to those smaller-order claims?  Would that be more intellectually responsible?  What would be lost?  Should art criticism be completely inductive?  Is such induction itself an illusion?  (As William James writes of all experience, the connections are all we experience, while the Lockean bits and atoms are conceptual fictions.)  New Criticism tried to ground itself in those smaller scale readings of individual, relatively brief art works.  But is the field of poetry, say, merely a collection of bits, or rather an immense network of relationships from the start?

Which is to say: if the higher order claims are necessary but necessarily unprovable and at times unfalsifiable, might not the model of hard sciences simply not be an accurate model for the human sciences?  

	

		Posted by:
		Luther Blissett |
		[Wednesday, 12 March 2008 at 09:37 AM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2008/03/can-a-reading-b.html?cid=106740626#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00e550f9dac78833)

[]()

	

		![JPool](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/02-50si.gif)
	

	

		

_Perhaps the issue is that scholars in the humanities aim (or need) not to be "right" but to be interesting?_

See, I guess I don't understand why these should be opposed rather than separate categories.

We all need to produce work that is interesting if we want others to read it.  This is partly a question of existing academic tastes, but interesting works can also shift the market, convincing us to take seriously questions and subjects that previously held little interest (indeed, especially for junior scholars, like me, the trick seems to be balancing novelty and familiarity).  On the other hand, while one can build a certain kind of career around a reputation as a serious but over-reaching provocateur, for one's scholarship to gain respect and influence it has to be persuasive, rather than simply interesting.

It seems to me that we have plenty of tools for evaluating whether an argument is a reasonable one, even if it can't be definitively proven or disproven.  To take Scott's original satire, faced with the argument that _The Clansman_ is an exercise in eroticized negrophillia, one isn’t simply reduced to declaring, “That’s preposterous.”  One could argue structurally that these examples are tenuous and cherry-picked, and that, even if accepted, they are more than counter-balanced by the rest of the book.  One could present evidence for a different kind of authorial intent, or show that contemporaneous readers did not in fact experience the novel in this way.  Finally, one could point out that a claim based on the principle that the world is exactly what I say that it is, is a very weak kind of knowledge claim, and one that is subject to immediate displacement.  None of these would disprove the original argument as such, but they would demonstrate why it’s not persuasive. 

	

		Posted by:
		JPool |
		[Wednesday, 12 March 2008 at 12:44 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2008/03/can-a-reading-b.html?cid=106765226#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00e550fc06df8833)

[]()

	

		![Jonathan Dresner](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/18-50si.gif)
	

	

		

I'm reminded of the ongoing debate over Said's _Orientalism_, and Foucault's _Discipline and Punish_, two works which were immensely influential but whose factual basis and interpretive methods have been criticized in recent years, to the point of calling the value of their methods into question. At this point it would be irresponsible for an historian to use either of them in a teaching situation without also offering caveats or counter-readings and I doubt they should be cited without the footnote also hedging a bit.

Then there's work like Chang&Halliday's _Mao: The Untold Story_ which is: a) a masterwork of new archival research; b) a hit-piece fueled by personal and ideological animosity; c) both of the above..... The reviews that I've seen have been either strongly positive (mostly from known conservative writers and non-historians) or strongly negative (mostly from actual historians of China). It contains claims which are crying out for independent evaluation and confirmation, and final judgement on the book is going to have to wait until that happens, which is not a position most reviewers are willing to take.

	

		Posted by:
		[Jonathan Dresner](http://froginawell.net) |
		[Wednesday, 12 March 2008 at 12:52 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2008/03/can-a-reading-b.html?cid=106766120#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00e55112752c8834)

[]()

	

		![JPool](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/02-50si.gif)
	

	

		

In my own field of African History, I was thinking in particular of something like Christopher Ehret's work, particularly in his synthesis [_Civilizations of Africa_](http://www.h-net.org/reviews/showrev.cgi?path=130501093457640), which is largely based on linguistic reconstruction.  The criticism of this work and Ehret's methodology is not, generally speaking, "That's not true," but instead "You don't know that."

	

		Posted by:
		JPool |
		[Wednesday, 12 March 2008 at 03:10 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2008/03/can-a-reading-b.html?cid=106783714#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00e550fdc5468833)

[]()

	

		![Fritz](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/05-50si.gif)
	

	

		

To paraphrase Aristotle: "It ain't math, folks.  You do the best you can do."

	

		Posted by:
		Fritz |
		[Thursday, 13 March 2008 at 11:00 AM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2008/03/can-a-reading-b.html?cid=106872970#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00e55121c2dc8834)

		

        