## Iowa Caucus Sparks Tribal Violence Throughout Midwest

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2008/01/iowa-caucus-spa.html
 * Saturday, January 05, 2008



As [Brad](http://delong.typepad.com/) would [say](http://delong.typepad.com/sdj/2008/01/why-oh-why-cant.html), "[Why oh why can't we have a better press corp](http://zunguzungu.wordpress.com/2008/01/05/fears-of-regional-instability-as-iowa-explodes-into-ethnic-violence/)?"
After record voter turnout in Iowa yesterday, angry supporters of
Barrack Obama have taken to the streets in protest of the announcement
that George Bush had won the state’s Democratic nomination by a wide
margin. The announcement came hours before the polls had closed,
sparking suspicion that the election’s integrity was compromised,
though an independent election commission headed by Jeb Bush certified
that the election was fair and balanced. There had been widespread
anticipation that Barrack Obama or another Democrat would easily win in
the polling.

[...]

Many Iowans are distressed that media coverage is making them look
just like any other midwestern military state. “This is not Michigan,”
said one voter, who wished not to be identified, “I can’t believe what
I’m seeing.”

Voters in Iowa select candidates according to a secretive ritual
known as the “caucus,” a poorly understood convocation of village and
tribal communities in which charisma and tribal reputation are believed
to sway opinion in unpredictable ways. Efforts to modernize this
process has run up against stubborn, ingrained attachment to the
pre-modern ritual, though many have suggested that reforming the
electoral process would do a great deal to bring a state largely
populated by subsistence farmers into the international community.

In the United States of Africa, few have taken notice, though some
pundits have issued calls for former colonial rulers to militarily
intervene in the commonwealth of American states, most of whom are
former colonies of Mexico and Brazil. “We’ve tried letting these people
rule themselves,” declared Oginga Odinga, Prime Minister of the USA,
“but all I ever see on TV is white people killing white people.”
		

* * *

### 2 Comments 

		

                
[]()

	

		![aaron](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/09-50si.gif)
	

	

		

Wow, I feel like I just got 3 minutes on the Ed Sullivan show!

	

		Posted by:
		[aaron](http://zunguzungu.wordpress.com) |
		[Saturday, 05 January 2008 at 08:31 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2008/01/iowa-caucus-spa.html?cid=96022094#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00e54fd4afb28834)

[]()

	

		![David](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/09-50si.gif)
	

	

		

White on White violence, but you know, they have been doing this for thousands of years. There is no helping them. 

	

		Posted by:
		David |
		[Saturday, 12 January 2008 at 07:45 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2008/01/iowa-caucus-spa.html?cid=96907104#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00e54ff03e988834)

		

        