## A David Foster Wallace Syllabus

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2008/09/a-david-foster.html
 * Tuesday, September 23, 2008



([_x-posted_](http://www.thevalve.org/go/valve/article/a\_david\_foster\_wallace\_syllabus/).)

(_[via UD.](http://www.margaretsoltan.com/?p=4643)_)

One of David Foster Wallace’s students posted [the syllabus](http://alasophia.blogspot.com/2008/09/david-foster-wallaces-syllabus.html)
to his “Literary Interpretation” course.  Before anyone accuses me of
taking a morbid interest in the recently deceased, let me say this:
people who write syllabi appreciate a fine syllabi, and this is a fine
syllabi.  Here’s the “BASIC COURSE SPIEL”:

The goals of this section of E67 are to survey certain
important forms of modern literature—short stories, novels, poems—and
to introduce you to some techniques for achieving a critical
appreciation of literary art.  “Critical appreciation” means having
smart, sophisticated reasons for liking whatever literature you like,
and being able to articulate those reasons to other people, especially
in writing.  Vital for critical appreciation is the ability to
“interpret” a piece of literature, which basically means coming up with
a cogent, interesting account of what a piece of lit means, what it’s
trying to do to/for the reader, what technical choices the author’s
made in order to achieve the effects she wants, and so on.  As you can
probably anticipate, the whole thing gets very complicated and abstract
and hard, which is one reason why entire college departments are
devoted to studying and interpreting literature.

From the “_Caveat Emptor_ Page”:

(2) Your instructor has taught intro lit courses before,
but not for several years, and never before at a college this
selective. The upshot is that there may be a certain pedagogical
clunkiness about this section of English 67. You will, in effect, be
helping me learn how to teach this class. The level of our discussions
may have to be adjusted up, or down, depending on how well-prepared you
guys are and how quickly you catch on to the concepts and techniques of
“close reading.” Certain approaches might turn out to be a waste of
time. There may be abrupt changes in the syllabus. Extra work may be
added. Let me say that again: Extra work may be added.

(4) Your instructor has high standards for the written work you turn
in. Take another close look at Course Rules & Procedures Items 4
and 7 on page 3 of the syllabus. I know that many professors say this
kind of hard-ass stuff at the beginning of the term but don’t actually
mean it or enforce it as the course wears on. I, however, do mean it,
and I will enforce it—feel free to verify this with students who’ve
taken other classes with me. If you want to improve your academic
writing and are willing to put extra time and effort into it, I am a
good teacher to have. But if you’re used to whipping off papers the
night before they’re due, running them quickly through the computer’s
Spellchecker, handing them in full of high-school errors and sentences
that make no sense, and having the professor accept them “because the
ideas are good” or something, please be informed that I draw no
distinction between the quality of one’s ideas and the quality of those
ideas’ verbal expression, and that I will not accept sloppy,
rough-draftish, or semiliterate college writing. Again, I am absolutely
not kidding.
		

* * *

### 1 Comment 

		

                
[]()

	

		![JPool](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/02-50si.gif)
	

	

		

That is pretty sweet.  Did you feel personally affronted that he apparently canceled the London reading?

	

		Posted by:
		JPool |
		[Wednesday, 24 September 2008 at 10:46 AM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2008/09/a-david-foster.html?cid=132036364#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef010534ca68d7970b)

		

        