## WHARTON!

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2008/02/wharton.html
 * Thursday, February 28, 2008



Copyright (c) 1980, 1982, 1983, 2006 Sekocom, Inc.  All rights reserved.   
WHARTON! is a registered trademark of Sekocom, Inc.  
Revision 23 / Serial number 8940726

[
West of an Old House, long in the Family
](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/c/ce/Zork\_screenshot.png)

You are
standing next to an old house.  It has large mansard roofs, big
chimneys, and to the east is a formal Italianate garden with a circular
courtyard, high hedges and an elaborate eighteenth-century-style
trellis.

&gt; e

You are in 

a
formal Italianate garden with a circular courtyard, high hedges and an
elaborate eighteenth-century-style trellis.  To the north is a pergola
filled with statuary.  To the south is an old fishpond guarded by
solemn-looking stone dogs.

&gt; s

You stand
before an old fishpond guarded by solemn-looking stone dogs.  To the
east is a retaining wall with a gate which opens into a narrow cabinet
garden containing playful rococo statues and shells and stones set in
the walls, and a fountain.

&gt; e

You are in 

a
narrow cabinet garden containing playful rococo statues and shells and
stones set in the walls, and a fountain.  To the south is a small
flight of steps leading up to a lemon garden with its "limonaia" where
lemon and orange trees, camellias and other semi-tender shrubs are
stored in winter.  To the your left are dark ilex woods. To your right,
the "boschetti."

&gt; eat bruschetta

You would be better served eating the holly, although it is mildly toxic and likely to cause vomiting or diarrhea.

&gt; eat bruschetta

You cannot eat "boschetti."  

&gt; do anyway

You eat a small garden, bloat terribly, feel death pangs, recover, and find yourself in 

a narrow cabinet garden
containing playful rococo statues and shells and stones set in the
walls, and a fountain.  To the south is a small flight of steps leading
up to a lemon garden with its "limonaia" where lemon and orange trees,
camellias and other semi-tender shrubs are stored in winter.  To the
your left are dark ilex woods. To your right, the "boschetti."  Happy?

&gt; no 

Like I care.

&gt; s

You climb 

a
small flight of steps leading
up to a lemon garden with its "limonaia" where lemon and orange trees,
camellias and other semi-tender shrubs are stored in winter.  In the
distance you hear people talking and the subtle hum of a classical
quartet.  To the east is a Colonial verandah.

&gt; eat lemon and orange

You are still full from eating a small garden.  You look at the lemon, then the orange, with evident disgust.

&gt; e asshole

You are in
a verandah.  The subtle hum is less subtle and you can almost make out
what they say about you in the room to your left.

&gt; what they say

Go south and I'll let you listen in.

&gt; s already

You are
standing in the hallway leading to a Louis XV bedroom stuffed with
Queen Anne furniture.  To your left is a gauche chinoiserie dining
room.  To your right, a Renaissance ballroom. 

&gt; people what they say

They know
you've been brooding over something lately, and they must find out what
it is, as it's in their interest to do so, since they always tell you
what they think.  They know that if only you trust them, but as you
have been so odd lately, they can't think what you've been plotting, or
whether the Lord Trevanna has divined your intentions.

&gt; um what

You have been withdrawn of late, so their concern is no surprise.

&gt; who cares

They evidently do.

&gt; brandish sword

You remove your wit from you heart-pocket and approach the women.  They cease to gossip.

&gt; brandish sword

They blush under the force of your compelling wit.

&gt; kill kill kill

You slay them with your tongue.  Their guilt for spreading unfounded rumors weighs upon them.

&gt; what

Isabel addresses you—

&gt; who

Isabel. 
She says that only this morning you were her supreme court of justice,
but that there was no appeal from your verdict.  That not an hour ago
you decided a case for her

—against herself! And now

—.
And now the worst of it is that it's not because you've changed. How
does she know if you've changed?  You haven't said a hundred words to
her.  And yet the years must have enriched you

—she
daresays you've doubled your capital. You've been in the thick of life,
and the metal you're made of brightens with use.  Success on some men
looks like a borrowed coat, she says, but it sits on you as though it
had been made to order.  She sees all this; she knows this; but she
doesn't FEEL it.  She doesn't feel anything, anywhere, she is numb.

&gt; brandish sword now

You say to her, why good God, we belonged to each other

—that you won't let her go

—

&gt; let her go

—that you've fought for things since that weren't worth a crooked sixpence; fought as well as other men. And she

—she

—you lost her because you couldn't make a scene

—you might have survived them, as men have been known to.  They're not necessarily fatal.

&gt; yes are kill self

She finds your self-deprecating display charming.

&gt; no with sword

You remove a handkerchief from the breast pocket of your dinner jacket.

&gt; where grue

You walk
into a gilt bamboo jardiniere, in which the primulas and cinerarias are
punctually renewed, and which blocks access to the bay window, where
the old-fashioned would have preferred a bronze reduction of the Venus
of Milo. The sofas and arm-chairs of pale brocade are cleverly grouped
about little plush tables densely covered with silver toys, porcelain
animals and efflorescent photograph frames, and tall rose-shaded lamps
shoot up like tropical flowers among the plants.  There is no grue
here, but to the right is still the Renaissance ballroom.

&gt; fine fine go ballroom

You stand
in the doorway, studying the petty manoeuvres of the women and the
resigned amenities of their partners.  You wonder whether these were
your friends, these mincing women, all paint and dye and whalebone,
these apathetic men who looked as much alike as the figures that
children cut out of a folded sheet of paper.  Was it to live amongst
such puppets, you ask yourself, that you sold your soul?  The bald man
with the globular stomach who made his pile in wrecking railroads and
the political lawyer who had been mixed up to his own advantage in an
ugly lobbying  transaction, whose wife was such a good manager that
they kept a brougham and victoria and always put in their season at
Newport and their spring trip to Europe, whose little ferret-faced
youth pretends this is not a domino-party at which the guest are
forbidden to unmask

—

&gt; kill self kill self kill self

"I'M A JEW!" you yell.

[_This has been another installment of [Classic Acephalous](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/classic\_acephalous/index.html) ... because I am lazy and the many things that aren't due are long overdue._]

		

* * *

### 2 Comments 

		

                
[]()

	

		![Daniel](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/10-50si.gif)
	

	

		

&gt;where grue  

indeed.

I enjoyed this post.

	

		Posted by:
		[Daniel](http://sohdan.blogspot.com/) |
		[Friday, 29 February 2008 at 05:43 AM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2008/02/wharton.html?cid=105179326#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00e5508b92938833)

[]()

	

		![Jon H](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/08-50si.gif)
	

	

		

Have you tried [Inform 7](www.inform-fiction.org)? You'd probably have fun making short pseudo-games instead of blog posts. It's a sweet environment for writing these games in a language that approximates English. For example:

Chapter 1 - Outside the Castle

The Drawbridge is a room. "[if the Drawbridge is unvisited]Even in your short absence, [the castle] has come to look strange to you again. When you came here first, you stood a long while on the drawbridge, unready to cross [the moat], for fear of the spells that might bind you if you did. This time it is too late to worry about such things[end if][if the Drawbridge is visited]There is little enough purpose in loitering outside: He and his servants never come out here, and whatever you must do, you will have to do within[end if]." The castle exterior is scenery in the drawbridge. The printed name of the castle exterior is "castle". Understand "tower" or "tower" or "drawbridge" or "bridge" as the castle exterior. The description is "The drawbridge looks longer than it actually is; the towers are so high that the tops are lost in cloud, and looking east or west, you cannot see the furthest extent of the walls. An optical illusion: it is smaller inside.

Probably."

The iron-barred gate is a door.  "An iron-barred gate leads [gate direction]." It is north of the Drawbridge and south of the Entrance Hall. It is closed and openable. Before entering the castle, try entering the gate instead. Before going inside in the Drawbridge, try going north instead. Understand "door" as the gate.

After opening the gate:  

	say "You shouldn't be able to open it, heavy as it is, but it swings aside lightly at your touch. The Beast said that it knows friend from enemy; and the castle, at least, still regards you as friend."

The description of the Entrance Hall is "There is no fire in the big [fireplace][if the Entrance Hall is unvisited], and no one is waiting for you here[end if]; the air is very cold. Over the gate, the old familiar [warning sign] is painted.

Various passages lead deeper into the castle: north towards the central courtyard, southwest to the guard tower, east and west into the libraries, the offices, the galleries. [if beast is seen]And no wonder he was not here to meet you.[otherwise]Somewhere in this maze, he waits; and he should be told as soon as possible that you did return.[end if]"  

	

		Posted by:
		Jon H |
		[Saturday, 01 March 2008 at 03:07 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2008/02/wharton.html?cid=105380166#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef00e550a392438834)

		

        