## Best to only ever fight wars you already won.

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2009/07/best-to-only-ever-fight-wars-you-already-won.html
 * Tuesday, July 07, 2009



It only took six months, but the mainstream media finally
accomplished what no conservative media outlet ever could have: it sent
a reporter into the Columbia library. In October 2008, Andrew McCarthy [complained](http://article.nationalreview.com/?q=NjY4YzdhMDBkZGQ3ZmU2MTUzYjdkMzc5ZjUzYmViZWM=) that it was impossible to learn anything about Obama’s heady days of Ayers-inspired radicalism at Columbia:

As [Ayers] so delicately told the _Times_, America makes him “want to puke” . . . Such statements should make Obama unelectable.

[Time](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2008/09/breaking-news-o.html) and [again](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2009/06/polygraphlevel-scholarship-may-suffice-for-harmless-speculation-about-the-authorship-of-midsummers-n.html), conservatives have proven that Obama is Ayers is Alinsky is Annenberg is [Hitler](http://liberalfascism.nationalreview.com/post/?q=ODk4MjUzZTZiY2JmMjQ4OTMwOTVkOTBlZDdkMWY1NjY=)—all they were lacking was the actual proof. No more. Thanks to the _Times_, they now have the evidence they were always pretty sure existed. How did the _Times_
get their hands on these hot documents? What did it do that McCarthy—a
former federal prosecutor for the Southern District of New York—could
not? _  
_

_It asked politely_.

[**Question:**](http://www.columbia.edu/cu/lweb/services/faq/answers/24494.html) May I use Columbia’s libraries if I am not a student, professor, or staff member at another academic institution?

**Answer:** If your public library does not have the
specific title or material you need for your research, obtain a
referral card from your public library. This card will give you a
one-day pass to Columbia University Libraries.

All McCarthy had to do to stop a man he considered a monster from
winning the White House was return to his old stomping grounds and ask
a librarian for a day-pass to Columbia. All _any_ conservative
who wanted to stop a man they believed would destroy America had to do
was to obtain a referral card from a public library. Instead, these
intrepid citizen-journalists prattled on endlessly about the research
other people declined to do; and now that someone did it, they are
incorporating their lazy reliance on the mainstream media into [another iteration of their tired jeremiad against it](http://www.firstthings.com/blogs/theanchoress/2009/07/06/obama-the-student-radical-russia/): “If only you had told me what I couldn’t have been bothered to discover myself _last year_,” they cry, “Obama might not be in Russia today sowing the seeds of our inevitable destruction.”

If you believed that a trip into the city and an afternoon in an
archive would spare America four years of tyranny, would you do it?
Would you fly into the city, rent a room, borrow a library card,
request a day-pass under false pretenses, and spend an afternoon in an
archive if you believed that doing so might save the world from nuclear
destruction? Or would you whine because no one will silver-platter you a smoking gun?

		

					[]()
			

We know what route the conservative punditry took, but who are we to begrudge them their moment of vindication? The _Times_
finally got around to finding their smoking gun for them. They now have
incontrovertible proof that Obama held, holds, and will forever harbor
deeply radical thoughts; that he held, holds, and will forever adhere
to an ideology hostile to American ideals and interests; that he held,
holds, and will forever—but we should allow him the courtesy of [hanging by his own rope](http://graphics8.nytimes.com/packages/images/nytint/docs/obama-s-1983-college-magazine-article/original.pdf):

The more sensitive among us struggle to extrapolate
experiences of war from our everyday experience, discussing the latest
mortality statistics from Guatemala, sensitizing ourselves to our
parents’ wartime memories, or incorporating into our framework a
reality as depicted by a Mailer or a Coppola. But the taste of war—the
sounds and chill, the dead bodies—are remote and far removed. We know
that wars have occurred, will occur, are occurring, but bringing such
experience down into our hearts, and taking continual, tangible steps
to prevent war, becomes a difficult task.

I know [one conservative](http://www.americanthinker.com/2009/06/breakthrough\_on\_the\_authorship\_1.html)
who won’t be happy to see how rhetorically savvy Obama was as a senior.
The pacing of the nested clauses, the balance of the alliteration, the
oratorical flourishes of the parallelism—all the features of his later
prose are in evidence long before Obama met Ayers. Other than that, we
learn nothing new about Obama from this passage. He opposes the
extrajudicial killing of noncombatants in Guatemala and believes that
high culture can counter the effect of popular culture, such that [_The Naked and the Dead_](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0312265050/diesekoschmar-20) and [_Apocalypse Now_](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B000FSME1A/diesekoschmar-20) work against [_First Blood_](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0004Z33EG/diesekoschmar-20) by showing us the horror! the horror! of war. Neither position qualifies as a shocking revelation.

In fact, the only aspects of this well-timed find with which conservatives take issue are his “[non-proliferation fetish](http://www.commentarymagazine.com/blogs/index.php/rubin/72321)”
and the anti-militaristic rhetoric in which he couches it. They bemoan
the senior’s support for “the dangerously delusional nuclear-freeze
movement,” and they mock him for insisting that focusing on arms
control to the exclusion of larger economic and political issues might
be, in his words, “another instance of focusing on the symptoms of a
problem instead of the disease itself.” These ideas, they suggest, are
so far afield of the American mainstream that Obama is forced to quote
a _reggae singer_ to substantiate them—and as Jennifer Rubin points out, what the reggae singer doesn’t know could very well kill us:

[W]hat is naïve, of course, is to think that Iran and
North Korea will be impressed by our disarmament efforts. No
consideration is given, just as none was given by the nuclear freeze
crowd a generation ago, to the possibility that disarmament will only
embolden our adversaries and confuse our allies.

Their argument is that, then as now, Obama cannot recognize that
being able to exterminate all life on Earth seven-hundred times over
possesses a strategic advantage over only being able to do so seventy.
Even absent a partner in our escalatory waltz, conservatives insist
that pushing the decimal point one slot to the left of absurdity will
embolden Iran and North Korea into—into—into what exactly? Defying
international law? Refusing to crumble under international pressure?
The young Obama understands what his opponents now do not:

Just because the status quo is more macho than its alternatives doesn’t mean it’s worth defending. In the same anti-masculinist vein, it's not [naïve to inform the Russians that there are still a couple of kinks in our missile defense system](http://patterico.com/2009/07/06/obama-the-russians-and-missile-defense/), because even if it ever successfully shot down anything, it was not designed to deter the Russians from attacking us:

[![Wheretheterroristslive](http://acephalous.typepad.com/.a/6a00d8341c2df453ef011571d526d4970b-500wi)](http://acephalous.typepad.com/.a/6a00d8341c2df453ef011571d526d4970b-pi) 

More to the point, the so-called revelations from the article in the _Columbia Sundial_ are only revelations to people who never read _The Audacity of Hope_, in which Obama addressed _all of these issues_, sometimes in a single paragraph:

The advent of nuclear weapons and “mutual assured
destruction” rendered the risk of war between the United States and the
Soviet Union fairly remote even before the Berlin Wall fell. Today, the
world’s most powerful nations (including, to an ever-increasing extent,
China)—and, just as important, the vast majority of the people who live
within these nations—are largely committed to a common set of
international rules governing trade, economic policy, and the legal and
diplomatic resolution of disputes, even if broader notions of liberty
and democracy aren’t widely observed within their own borders. The
growing threat, then, comes primarily from those parts of the world on
the margins of the global economy where the international “rules of the
road” have not taken hold—the realm of weak or failing states,
arbitrary rule, corruption, and chronic violence; lands in which an
overwhelming majority of the population is poor, uneducated, and cut
off from the global information grid; places where the rulers fear
globalization will loosen their hold on power, undermine traditional
cultures, or displace indigenous institutions.

In short, conservatives are using the “discovery” of this article to
show Americans that, in opposing Reagan, Obama proves himself to be
just another acolyte of the pacifistic hippie radicalism that almost
lost us the Cold War. What I find remarkable is not that the political
formula developed by Reagan worked at the time, but just how durable
the narrative that he helped promote has proven to be. Despite a
forty-year remove, the tumult of the sixties and the subsequent
backlash continues to drive our political discourse. Partly it
underscores how deeply felt the conflicts of the sixties must have been
for the men and women who came of age at that time, and the degree to
which the arguments of the era were understood not simply as political
disputes but as individual choices that defined personal identity and
moral standing.

Wait—who wrote [those last three sentences](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0307237702/diesekoschmar-20)? 

Well, whoever it was, he was some sorta prescient.

(_[x-posted](http://edgeofthewest.wordpress.com/2009/07/07/best-to-only-ever-fight-the-wars-you-already-won/)_.)

			

* * *

### 6 Comments 

		

                
[]()

	

		![JPool](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/02-50si.gif)
	

	

		

Nice.  I like the balance of snark and critique in this one a lot.  

Question: Is the map yours?  If it isn't it's missing an attribution, and if it is I can't believe you used that font.

	

		Posted by:
		JPool |
		[Tuesday, 07 July 2009 at 09:27 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2009/07/best-to-only-ever-fight-wars-you-already-won.html?cid=6a00d8341c2df453ef011571d6c4c3970b#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef011571d6c4c3970b)

[]()

	

		![SEK](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/12-50si.gif)
	

	

		

I stole a version of that map from [here](http://www.mda.mil/mdalink/html/mdalink.html), but I can't link to it as it's a flash-based site; then I colored it in and labeled it with the awesomely OMG TEH MUSLIMS TICKING BOMB TORTURE TORTURE TORTURE NOW!!!1!!1!!111 font.

	

		Posted by:
		[SEK](http://acephalous.typepad.com/) |
		[Tuesday, 07 July 2009 at 09:42 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2009/07/best-to-only-ever-fight-wars-you-already-won.html?cid=6a00d8341c2df453ef011571d6fae4970b#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef011571d6fae4970b)

[]()

	

		![Sisyphus](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/13-50si.gif)
	

	

		

I need to hear more about the connections between the kangaroos, Ayers, and SALT-II.

	

		Posted by:
		[Sisyphus](http://academiccog.blogspot.com/) |
		[Wednesday, 08 July 2009 at 01:23 AM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2009/07/best-to-only-ever-fight-wars-you-already-won.html?cid=6a00d8341c2df453ef011571d8604e970b#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef011571d8604e970b)

[]()

	

		![cp](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/18-50si.gif)
	

	

		

Columbia has given us Pete Nice, Max Kellerman, Alexander "Colonel" Hamilton, and now Obama.  Four of the most dangerous citizens to ever live.  Someone should do something!

	

		Posted by:
		cp |
		[Wednesday, 08 July 2009 at 01:02 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2009/07/best-to-only-ever-fight-wars-you-already-won.html?cid=6a00d8341c2df453ef011571dc0c7f970b#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef011571dc0c7f970b)

[]()

	

		![Rich Puchalsky](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/15-50si.gif)
	

	

		

The library day-pass story is unbelievably lame.  Libraries are not hard to break into -- \*their whole purpose is accessibility\*.  The conservatives involved probably never did any research, even as students, and have no interest in anything even remotely intellectual, and therefore project their own ideas on how they would run a library onto the actual ones.

	

		Posted by:
		[Rich Puchalsky](http://rpuchalsky.blogspot.com) |
		[Wednesday, 08 July 2009 at 01:48 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2009/07/best-to-only-ever-fight-wars-you-already-won.html?cid=6a00d8341c2df453ef011571dc6989970b#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef011571dc6989970b)

[]()

	

		![SEK](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/12-50si.gif)
	

	

		

_I need to hear more about the connections between the kangaroos, Ayers, and SALT-II._

I'm trying to bait people into doing just that as we speak.  Updates to come.

_Someone should do something!_

Block access to the library already!  They're in there learning DANGER!

_The conservatives involved probably never did any research, even as students, and have no interest in anything even remotely intellectual, and therefore project their own ideas on how they would run a library onto the actual ones._

Bingo!  I was amused, then despondent, at the fact that conservatives are basically claiming that the media is biased because it won't do their job for them and they're too lazy to do it themselves.  They're such . . . students in that respect.

	

		Posted by:
		[SEK](http://acephalous.typepad.com/) |
		[Wednesday, 08 July 2009 at 07:32 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2009/07/best-to-only-ever-fight-wars-you-already-won.html?cid=6a00d8341c2df453ef011571de8f7c970b#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef011571de8f7c970b)

		

        