## My exclusive interview with former Alaska Governor Sarah Palin...

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2010/01/my-exclusive-interview-with-former-alaskan-governor-sarah-palin.html
 * Friday, January 15, 2010



...[can be read here](http://lefarkins.blogspot.com/2010/01/exclusive-lgm-lands-palin-interview.html) or found below the fold.

		

					[]()
			

**SEK:** Welcome, folks, to my first (and most certainly last) [interview with former Vice Presidential-candidate](http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,583028,00.html),
Sarah Palin. Before we start, Sarah, I want to read what I wrote last
night in my journal—I'm only kidding. That wouldn't be professional.
How about we start with an easy one? I know how much you love circles,
Sarah, so how about you talk in one for me?**  

PALIN:** The political system is what creates this disenchantment with the people looking at the political system.  

**SEK:**
You are a marvel. Now, say something that reveals yourself to be even
dumber than your haters think you are about, say, the results of the
last election.  

**PALIN:** That is not a representative form of government that our country was founded upon.  

**SEK:** It certainly isn't. I mean, it can't be. Governments are only representative when they represent the perspective of—  

**PALIN:** Common sense conservatives.  

**SEK:** With—  

**PALIN:**
Common sense conservative values. That's why you see pressure from the
tea party movement, from others, wanting to—wanting those common sense
conservative values back in.   

**SEK:** Such as?  

**PALIN:** Common sense solutions that sometimes we're made to feel stupid because we believe in these common sense solutions.  

**SEK:** Exactly. Do you think things will change?  

**PALIN:**
I think things are going to change, too. And if you look back in
history, you see that it is about—every 200 years, something
drastically changes in a society, in a culture, in a governmental
system. We're due for that change—just on a historical perspective, it
shows us that yes, something is coming.  

**SEK:** You really believe that?  

**PALIN:** I do believe it, because again, we can't be so stupid as to see these common sense solutions.  

**SEK:** Speaking of the future, is it here today?  

**PALIN:** Already the change is creating this unrecognizable system that we're a part of.  

**SEK:** In the past, could the French see into the future, and if so, how would they feel about the French today?  

**PALIN:**
Even the French recognized, too, the potential in this free country.
And the French gifted the Statue of Liberty to us, in partnership, this
international symbol of liberty and freedom—the French hoping that we
wouldn't lose that and we won't evolve into something more along their
lines.  

**SEK:** Precisely. One last thing: can you prove that the copy-editors at Fox are out to get you?  

**PALIN:** Well, let me tell you one thing in that vain.  

**SEK:** Thank you, Governor Palin, it's been a pleasure.  

**PALIN:** And the people are going to decide and I think he is going go and it is time.  

**SEK:** Thank you, Governor, the interview's over. You—  

**PALIN:** My favorite. That would be great.  

**SEK:** Your favorite? Favorite what? Seriously, Madame Governor, you—  

**PALIN:** Gems. Gems representing the natural resources in our nation.  

**SEK:** Gems?  

**PALIN:** Yes. I thought, oh, no, he's going to do a gotcha and that's why I google—I had Track google real quick.  

**SEK:** A little help in here? Somebody?  

**PALIN:**
So full of symbolism, though. And those seven points represent our
seas, our continents. Anyway, my son, I asked him very quickly, "Tell
me what all this means." He says, "Quite timely, mom. I'll tell you
what the Statue of Liberty means. I just got a tattoo of the Statue of
Liberty on my arm."  

**SEK:** _Anybody_?  

**PALIN:** I know what is coming.  

**SEK:** That makes one of us.  

**PALIN:**
We just brace ourselves. But so be it. There are a lot of important
things going on in this world right now. And I think that if we were to
hesitate and hunker down and not say what we believe, then we're going
to be part of the system that so many Americans are losing faith in.
I'm not going to be a part of that. But I learned a lot about it this
morning. I would be perfectly happy to go back to Wasilla, Alaska, with
my five children and grandson and raise a happy, healthy family and
love the great outdoors and do the things we do in Alaska. Now, let me
address legal immigration and we need to continue to be so welcoming
and inviting of those who are represented there by our Statue of
Liberty. The immigrants, of course, built this country...

			

* * *

### 8 Comments 

		

                
[]()

	

		![Ahistoricality](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/04-50si.gif)
	

	

		

As Beck said, "Painful yet?"

The combination of Palin's speaking style and the nearly illiterate transcription does make for some real moments. 

But I have to say this: I read that interview, and Palin made more sense than Beck. Beck comes across as a delusional paranoid who's desperately looking for companionship, and Palin comes across as the saner of the two.

	

		Posted by:
		[Ahistoricality](http://ahistoricality.blogspot.com) |
		[Friday, 15 January 2010 at 05:09 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2010/01/my-exclusive-interview-with-former-alaskan-governor-sarah-palin.html?cid=6a00d8341c2df453ef0120a7da6960970b#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef0120a7da6960970b)

[]()

	

		![Randy Pickard](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/16-50si.gif)
	

	

		

When you reach the end of your days, is this webpage all you will have to offer?  Sad.  So sad. But maybe you really are out there trying to some good with the rest of your day.

	

		Posted by:
		Randy Pickard |
		[Friday, 15 January 2010 at 08:11 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2010/01/my-exclusive-interview-with-former-alaskan-governor-sarah-palin.html?cid=6a00d8341c2df453ef012876e02316970c#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef012876e02316970c)

[]()

	

		![GeoX](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/17-50si.gif)
	

	

		

Authentic frontier gibberish!

	

		Posted by:
		[GeoX](http://inchoatia.blogspot.com) |
		[Friday, 15 January 2010 at 08:14 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2010/01/my-exclusive-interview-with-former-alaskan-governor-sarah-palin.html?cid=6a00d8341c2df453ef012876e02554970c#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef012876e02554970c)

[]()

	

		![SEK](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/12-50si.gif)
	

	

		

_Beck comes across as a delusional paranoid who's desperately looking for companionship, and Palin comes across as the saner of the two._

There's a line a person can cross, after which point, there is a courtship happening.  Beck clearly crossed that line.

_When you reach the end of your days, is this webpage all you will have to offer?_

Why are all you Palin supporters so emotionally manipulative?  Not that it works, mind you, I'm simply curious as to why the cross-section of people enthusiastic about Palin includes people who believe that cheap emotional ploys are rhetorically effective. 

_Authentic frontier gibberish!_

I'm not so sure it's unadulterated gibberish anymore, as there are enough consistent talking points that some of it is now genuinely robotic.

	

		Posted by:
		[SEK](http://acephalous.typepad.com/) |
		[Friday, 15 January 2010 at 08:57 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2010/01/my-exclusive-interview-with-former-alaskan-governor-sarah-palin.html?cid=6a00d8341c2df453ef0120a7dd67d0970b#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef0120a7dd67d0970b)

[]()

	

		![tomemos](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/07-50si.gif)
	

	

		

"But maybe you really are out there trying to some good with the rest of your day."

…Sarah, is that you?

	

		Posted by:
		[tomemos](http://tomemos.wordpress.com) |
		[Friday, 15 January 2010 at 08:57 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2010/01/my-exclusive-interview-with-former-alaskan-governor-sarah-palin.html?cid=6a00d8341c2df453ef0120a7dd67ed970b#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef0120a7dd67ed970b)

[]()

	

		![Ahistoricality](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/04-50si.gif)
	

	

		

_people who believe that cheap emotional ploys are rhetorically effective._ 

I'd put it the other way: "people who believe that cheap rhetorical ploys are emotionally effective." It's not reasonable or evidence-based to believe that they're seriously trying to win an argument in rhetorical terms: they're trying to distract and enrage, and to prop up their sense of self-worth by denigrating others (there is a _lot_ of that going on in the interview, too). 

	

		Posted by:
		[Ahistoricality](http://ahistoricality.blogspot.com) |
		[Friday, 15 January 2010 at 10:54 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2010/01/my-exclusive-interview-with-former-alaskan-governor-sarah-palin.html?cid=6a00d8341c2df453ef0120a7ddb9d6970b#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef0120a7ddb9d6970b)

[]()

	

		![SEK](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/12-50si.gif)
	

	

		

_I'd put it the other way..._

And, I think, be right to do so, as that's much closer to what I meant than what I actually wrote was.  

	

		Posted by:
		[SEK](http://acephalous.typepad.com/) |
		[Friday, 15 January 2010 at 10:59 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2010/01/my-exclusive-interview-with-former-alaskan-governor-sarah-palin.html?cid=6a00d8341c2df453ef012876e0977e970c#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef012876e0977e970c)

[]()

	

		![Adam Roberts](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/15-50si.gif)
	

	

		

I see you've gone rogue, Scott.  You rogue.

	

		Posted by:
		[Adam Roberts](http://www.adamroberts.com) |
		[Saturday, 16 January 2010 at 06:30 AM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2010/01/my-exclusive-interview-with-former-alaskan-governor-sarah-palin.html?cid=6a00d8341c2df453ef0120a7dea329970b#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef0120a7dea329970b)

		

        