## Today in 1904

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2010/06/today-in-1904.html
 * Wednesday, June 16, 2010



			

At 8 a.m. on the morning of 16 June 1904, two men woke up.  One 
shaved for class and breakfasted with his usurper and an anti-Semite.  
The other, a Jew, purchased a pork kidney and serves it to his wife in 
the same bed in which she cuckolded him.  He left to pick up a letter 
from his secret sweetheart and chatted with the people he met on his 
way to the baths.  Once clean, he attended a funeral and saw a 
mysterious man.

After the funeral, he tried to place an advertisement in a local 
newspaper but decided more research was required, so he scooted off to 
the library where, unbeknown to him, the first of our two men was 
disquisiting on Shakespeare.

Many people walked around, including our Jew, who decided to follow 
his morning kidney with an afternoon liver.  He ogled the barmaids and 
thought about his wife who, if his suspicions were correct, would soon 
be cuckholding him again.  So he exited the bar with the pretty 
reminders of his pain and entered another full of anti-Semites.  Fists 
and cans were thrown.

Troubled by thoughts of wife and ancient grievances, he wandered 
seaside way and publicly co-masturbated with a cripple.  He later 
attended the birth of a child and the English language before following 
 our first man into the red-light district.  He caught up with him, 
himself, himself-in-drag, his dead grandfather, Nobodaddy, a giant green
 crab, a talking hat-stand and ducked out when the police arrived.  
Chastened, the two men entered a dive and met a drunken sailor.  They 
absconded to the home of the Jew and bonded while urinating under the 
stars.

As 16 June 1904 came to a close, the Jew returned to his troubled 
marital bed and asked his wife to serve him breakfast in it tomorrow.

She considered his request but never decided one way or the other.

(Happy [Bloomsday](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bloomsday)!  Sorry
 about the spoilers.  This was originally published [elsewhere](http://edgeofthewest.wordpress.com/2008/06/16/today-in-history/).)


		

* * *

### 4 Comments 

		

                
[]()

	

		![SEK](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/12-50si.gif)
	

	

		

I re-post this not because I came to grad school to be a Joycean; nor because my first presentation was at a Joyce conference in Trieste; nor because as someone who is both Irish and Jewish, I sympathize with the cultural dilemma of Bloom; no, I re-post this because _Ulysses_ is, to this day, still my favorite novel, and most novels don’t have days dedicated to celebrating them.

	

		Posted by:
		[SEK](http://acephalous.typepad.com/) |
		[Wednesday, 16 June 2010 at 08:29 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2010/06/today-in-1904.html?cid=6a00d8341c2df453ef01348482da21970c#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef01348482da21970c)

[]()

	

		![Mike Russo](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/12-50si.gif)
	

	

		

Amen, Scott.

(He says, while drinking a Guinness).

	

		Posted by:
		Mike Russo |
		[Wednesday, 16 June 2010 at 09:38 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2010/06/today-in-1904.html?cid=6a00d8341c2df453ef0133f15bfa95970b#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef0133f15bfa95970b)

[]()

	

		![ads](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/12-50si.gif)
	

	

		

"publicly co-masturbated with a cripple"

Are you sure? I can never be sure. I have argued that it's co only in LB's mind. 

	

		Posted by:
		[ads](http://adswithoutproducts.com) |
		[Saturday, 19 June 2010 at 03:04 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2010/06/today-in-1904.html?cid=6a00d8341c2df453ef013484a840f0970c#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef013484a840f0970c)

[]()

	

		![James T](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/04-50si.gif)
	

	

		

And that man's name was Jesus Christ.

	

		Posted by:
		James T |
		[Tuesday, 22 June 2010 at 11:47 AM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2010/06/today-in-1904.html?cid=6a00d8341c2df453ef0133f191e8e8970b#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef0133f191e8e8970b)

		

        