## RNC delayed by one day. Since when do Republicans pay attention to climate models?

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2012/08/rnc-delayed-by-one-day-since-when-do-republicans-pay-attention-to-climate-models.html
 * Sunday, August 26, 2012



Everyone knows that predicting the future is incredibly easy, whereas
 explaining the past is incredibly difficult. For example, in 1933 
everyone in the entire world could foresee that Hitler's rise to power 
would lead directly to the Final Solution, whereas today, it's 
impossible to prove that the Holocaust even happened. Similarly, today 
everyone in the Republican Party can look at the meteorological maps and
 foresee that delaying the convention by a day is a prudent idea, 
whereas a decade hence, they won't even be able to prove that a 
"Hurricane Isaac" delayed their trip to "Tampa Bay" to nominate 
something called a "Mitt Romney" to represent their "Party" in the 
"White House." It'll be called "Convention Theory" and will, of course, 
merely be a "theory."

Just like global warming and the Holocaust.

If ever there were a time to slam conservatives for their selective 
belief systems, it is now. If they truly don't believe in that 
scientists can accurately account for climatological events, we should 
hold their feet to the fire and demand mandatory attendance for all 
planned speakers. Doesn't matter if Jindal [wants to stay in Louisiana](http://www.foxnews.com/politics/2012/08/26/gop-governors-in-isaac-crosshairs-are-staying-home-delaying-convention-trips/),
 because by the standards he otherwise champions there's no proof that 
Hurricane Isaac will hit New Orleans. It's only a "theory." If [Isaac does hit New Orleans](http://www.forbes.com/sites/weatherbell/2012/08/26/tropical-storm-isaac-should-rival-hurricane-katrina/), it won't mean anything other than weather. Pat Robertson [won't go on national television](http://mediamatters.org/research/2005/09/13/religious-conservatives-claim-katrina-was-gods/133804)
 and declare that Isaac's landing is God's Punishment. The optics of 
Republicans partying at their convention while New Orleans drowns again 
won't be indicative of the Party's disregard for Americans who are poor 
or black, it'll be a creation of the liberal media intended to make the 
Republicans look callous. "We'd planned this convention _for months_ and
 removing Obama from office is paramount to the plight of an already 
drowned city," not a single one of them will say. But some conservative 
bloggers will note -- as they did during Katrina -- that New Orleans 
deserves its death because it's low-lying and within a common hurricane 
track, and they'll base their conviction on solid evidence, by which 
they'll mean the same geological record and climate modeling that 
relegates global warming to the status of "theory."

Just like the Holocaust.

		

* * *

### 1 Comment 

		

                
[]()

	

		![Ahistoricality](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/04-50si.gif)
	

	

		

I didn't realize, when I read this earlier, that someone in the Godforsaken OldWhiteGuys Party had actually come out and said that the Holocaust didn't happen. I thought you were making a tragi-comic reach, and couldn't decide whether it was tragedy or comedy that had succeeded. 

Now I know. 

	

		Posted by:
		[Ahistoricality](http://ahistoricality.blogspot.com) |
		[Sunday, 26 August 2012 at 09:18 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2012/08/rnc-delayed-by-one-day-since-when-do-republicans-pay-attention-to-climate-models.html?cid=6a00d8341c2df453ef017c317d57f6970b#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef017c317d57f6970b)

		

        