## "Wikipedia informed Roth that it would require 'secondary sources' to verify his assertion that his novel was not inspired by the life of Anatole Broyard"

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2012/09/wikipedia-informed-roth-that-it-would-require-secondary-sources-to-verify-that-his-assertion-that-hi.html
 * Friday, September 07, 2012



That seemingly innocuous statement is from the [“Inspiration” subsection](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The\_Human\_Stain#Inspiration) of the Wikipedia entry on [Philip Roth](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philip\_Roth)’s novel [_The Human Stain_](www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0375726349/diesekoschmar-20).
 I write “seemingly innocuous” because it points to problems central to
 both Wikipedia’s operating ethos and literary analysis. Speaking to the
 latter first: this isn’t a case about what a text _means_ or what its author _intended it to mean_
 so we can avoid the hairier arguments about whether meaning resides 
within a text or is communicated through it. This argument is about 
source material. Where something came from instead of what and how it 
means. According to a Wikipedia-approved secondary source, [Michiko Kakutani](http://www.nytimes.com/library/books/050200roth-book-review.html), _The Human Stain_

is the story of a black man who decided to pass himself 
off as white.    This premise seems to have been inspired by the life 
story of Anatole Broyard—a critic for _The New York Times_ who died in 1990—at least as recounted by Henry Louis Gates Jr. in his 1997 book _13 Ways of Looking at a Black Man_.

Kakutani’s  __ review meets all Wikipedia’s criteria for a “[reliable source](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Verifiability#Reliable\_sources).” Except it isn’t. She said the “premise _seems_
 to have been inspired by the life story of Anatole Broyard,” which 
indicates that she’s no more familiar with the source material than 
anyone else. Charles Taylor’s [review](http://www.salon.com/2000/04/24/roth\_3/)
 of the novel at Salon constituted the other “secondary source” for the 
Broyard connection and made its way into the Wikipedia entry thus:

Taylor argues that Roth had to have been at least partly inspired by the case of [Anatole Broyard](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anatole\_Broyard), a literary critic who, like the protagonist of _The Human Stain_, was a man identified as [Creole](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Louisiana\_Creole\_people) who spent his entire professional life more-or-less as [white](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/White\_people).

But as with Kakutani, Taylor’s evidence—mistakenly identified in the Wikipedia entry as an argument—is also pure supposition:

There’s no way Roth could have tackled this subject 
without thinking of  Anatole Broyard, the late literary critic who 
passed as white for many  years.

Given the “strength” of the “evidence” provided by these secondary 
sources, there’s no need to perform a detailed literary analysis to 
determine that the connection to Broyard didn’t warrant inclusion in the
 Wikipedia entry. [Since no one else would the task fell to Roth’s biographer](http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The\_Human\_Stain&diff=next&oldid=493566373):

		

					[]()
			

[![human stain01](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/human-stain01.jpg "human stain01")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/human-stain01.jpg)Or at least someone claiming to be his biographer. [An editor demand proof and re-inserted the Broyard bit](http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The\_Human\_Stain&diff=prev&oldid=508306243):

[![human stain02](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/human-stain02.jpg "human stain02")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/human-stain02.jpg)

[At which point Roth’s alleged and now annoyed biographer re-re-deleted the Broyant bit](http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The\_Human\_Stain&diff=next&oldid=508306243):

[![human stain03](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/human-stain03.jpg "human stain03")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/human-stain03.jpg)Later that afternoon [a different editor re-re-inserted the Broyant bit and _added a little more on it_](http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The\_Human\_Stain&diff=next&oldid=508312829):

[![human stain04](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/human-stain04.jpg "human stain04")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/human-stain04.jpg)This other editor, [Parkwells](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Parkwells), [then took it upon him- or herself to further substantiate the idea that Roth based his novel on Broyard](http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The\_Human\_Stain&diff=next&oldid=508315967):

[![human stain05](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/human-stain05.jpg "human stain05")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/human-stain05.jpg)

So despite Roth’s purported desire that there be less about Broyard in the entry, [Parkwells is determined that there be more](http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The\_Human\_Stain&diff=next&oldid=508321974).
 Remember Kakutani’s weak proposition about what the premise of the 
novel “seems” to be? Here’s how Parkwells translates her “seems”:

[![human stain06](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/human-stain06.jpg "human stain06")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/human-stain06.jpg)

Kakutani’s now been “struck,” as if with great force, by the parallels between Roth’s novel and Broyard’s life. [But Parkwells’ not finished yet](http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The\_Human\_Stain&diff=next&oldid=508325118):

[![human stain07](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/human-stain07.jpg "human stain07")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/human-stain07.jpg)

He or she would continue to bulwark this connection because Wikipedia
 editors are notoriously protective of and deferential to their 
secondary sources. It’s not enough for Roth’s biographer to insist that 
the connection is spurious. It’s not as if Roth himself could start a 
blog or open a Twitter account or contact Wikipedia and have Parkwells’ 
revisions removed because [Wikipedia policy doesn’t consider self-publications to be reputable secondary sources](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Reliable\_sources#Self-published\_sources\_.28online\_and\_paper.29):

Anyone can create a website or [pay to have a book published](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vanity\_press),
  then claim to be an expert in a certain field. For that reason  
self-published media—whether books, newsletters, personal websites, open
  [wikis](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wiki), blogs, personal pages on social networking sites, [Internet forum](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet\_forum) postings, or [tweets](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Twitter)—are largely not acceptable. This includes any website whose content is largely **user-generated**, including the [Internet Movie Database](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet\_Movie\_Database) (IMDB), [Cracked.com](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cracked.com), CBDB.com, collaboratively created websites such as [wikis](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wiki),
  and so forth, with the exception of material on such sites that is  
labeled as originating from credentialed members of the sites’ editorial
  staff, rather than users.

So Roth did what anyone would do in such a situation: [he transformed himself into a “secondary source” by writing an “Open Letter to Wikipedia” in _The New Yorker_](http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/books/2012/09/an-open-letter-to-wikipedia.html):

Dear Wikipedia,

I am Philip Roth. I had reason recently to read for the first time [the Wikipedia entry](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The\_Human\_Stain)
 discussing my novel “The Human Stain.” The entry contains a serious  
misstatement that I would like to ask to have removed. This item entered
  Wikipedia not from the world of truthfulness but from the babble of  
literary gossip—there is no truth in it at all.

Yet when, through an official interlocutor, I recently petitioned  
Wikipedia to delete this misstatement, along with two others, my  
interlocutor was told by the “English Wikipedia Administrator”—in a  
letter dated August 25th and addressed to my interlocutor—that I, Roth, 
 was not a credible source: “I understand your point that the author is 
 the greatest authority on their own work,” writes the Wikipedia  
Administrator—“but we require secondary sources.”

Thus was created the occasion for this open  letter. 
After failing to get a change made through the usual channels, I  don’t 
know how else to proceed.

My novel “The Human Stain” was described in the entry as “allegedly  
inspired by the life of the writer Anatole Broyard.” (The precise  
language has since been altered by Wikipedia’s collaborative editing,  
but this falsity still stands.)

This alleged allegation is in no way substantiated by fact. “The  
Human Stain” was inspired, rather, by an unhappy event in the life of my
  late friend Melvin Tumin, professor of sociology at Princeton for some
  thirty years.

Now that’s he’s written this letter he’s become a reputable secondary source about himself. So concludes _l’affair du ou de la Parkwells._
 Or does it? Outside all of the usual issues with its editorial 
politics, Roth’s clever circumvention of Wikipedia’s citation policies 
points to a fundamental weakness in them. His “Open Letter” is no differ
 in substance from the self-published media Wikipedia bans: it’s 
essentially a personal website, blog post or Internet forum posting that
 his stature allows him to publish in _The New Yorker_. It’s 
self-publication in all but form and that’s a problem: he could be 
lying. The verification process instituted to avoid having people with 
Wikipedia entries lying about themselves has been thwarted by a 
publisher deferring to a powerful author. What amused me about the whole
 affair—beside the fact that Roth brooded from August 20th until 
September 7th about lines in a Wikipedia entry—is that a solution that 
didn’t require the spirit of Wikipedia’s editorial policy had been 
available the entire time: Roth’s biographer, [Blake Baily](http://artsbeat.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/09/05/philip-roth-to-cooperate-with-new-biographer/),
 could’ve identified himself by name and indicated that he could 
independently verify both the tenuousness of Roth’s relations with 
Broyard and the depth of his friendship with Melvin Tumin. All he had to
 do was write an on-the-fly-excerpt from Roth’s forthcoming biography on
 any of a million reputable literary sites that would’ve jumped at the 
chance to publish it. At that point the opinions Roth aired in his “Open
 Letter” would ascend into fact. Why? Because someone else corroborated 
them.

Meaning we’re not significantly better off than when we started. Why 
am I going on at such length about this? Because I fancy myself [an historicist](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/04/today\_seems\_to\_.html) and this affair addresses an issue near and dear to my heart. If I were to investigate the cultural and historical context of _The Human Stain_, a novel whose narrative present is the late 1990s, my researches would have turned up information about [the prominent _New York Times_ critic Anatole Broyard](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anatole\_Broyard)
 and the controversy surrounding his death. I would have considered the 
1996 revelation that Broyard had spent his life passing to be a 
significant part of the novel’s cultural and historical context _because it is_. _The Human Stain_ was
 published in an environment in which its audience, including Kakutani 
and Taylor, were primed to understand it as belonging to larger interest
 in the politics of passing at the end of the 20th Century and they were
 right to do so. I would have been too. Philip Roth is well within his 
right to identify his inspiration with all the specificity he desires, 
but he doesn’t have the right to alter future perceptions of his 
cultural and historical moment by insisting that he somehow lived 
outside it. It doesn’t matter when he learned about Broyard: he was 
still living and writing in a moment that was informed by the 
disclosure.

Roth’s letter is an attempt to deny that the world in which he lives defines him. That also happens to be the central theme in _The Human Stain_.
 How Roth fails to see the irony I don’t know. The point is that Roth 
was wrong to circumvent Wikipedia’s sensible editorial policy, but I 
have a feeling that’s not how this affair’s going to play out in a 
literary media ever eager to put upstarts like Wikipedia in their place.

			

* * *

### 6 Comments 

		

                
[]()

	

		![mxyzptlk](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/20-50si.gif)
	

	

		

This reminds me of a Lewis Black bit where he talks about having to audition for a role in a sitcom based on _himself_, and he later got a call that the producers decided to go with someone else -- "Unbeknownst to me, there was a better _me_ out there."

Correct me if I'm wrong, but wasn't George Herriman ("Krazy Kat") also a Creole who passed? From what I remember, he used to pass as Greek, and at one point during the Great Depression, he was earning more off his comics than the POTUS earned as POTUS. 

...krazy...

	

		Posted by:
		[mxyzptlk](http://profile.typepad.com/mxyzptlk) |
		[Friday, 07 September 2012 at 06:51 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2012/09/wikipedia-informed-roth-that-it-would-require-secondary-sources-to-verify-that-his-assertion-that-hi.html?cid=6a00d8341c2df453ef017d3be63f67970c#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef017d3be63f67970c)

[]()

	

		![SEK](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/12-50si.gif)
	

	

		

You're right about Herriman. I liked that his always-wears-his-hat-so-you-can't-see-his-kinky-hair schtick actually worked _for his entire life_. He was a true pioneer of the [Never Nude Movement](http://arresteddevelopment.wikia.com/wiki/Never\_Nude). 

	

		Posted by:
		[SEK](http://acephalous.typepad.com/) |
		[Friday, 07 September 2012 at 06:59 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2012/09/wikipedia-informed-roth-that-it-would-require-secondary-sources-to-verify-that-his-assertion-that-hi.html?cid=6a00d8341c2df453ef017d3be64559970c#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef017d3be64559970c)

[]()

	

		![NickS](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/04-50si.gif)
	

	

		

Thanks for this post, it's an interesting back and forth and not one I would have payed attention to otherwise.

Personally my initial reaction is to be happy to see Roth putting his views on record. I think they should be cited in the wikipedia entry, and I find it a satisfying element of the story that he was able to find a way to publish his letter so that it would meet the citation criteria. 

So I'm not entirely convinced by this sentence, "It doesn’t matter when he learned about Broyard: he was still living and writing in a moment that was informed by the disclosure." But I will mull it over.

	

		Posted by:
		[NickS](http://www.beforeyoulisten.com) |
		[Friday, 07 September 2012 at 09:06 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2012/09/wikipedia-informed-roth-that-it-would-require-secondary-sources-to-verify-that-his-assertion-that-hi.html?cid=6a00d8341c2df453ef01774495f1db970d#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef01774495f1db970d)

[]()

	

		![jme](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/16-50si.gif)
	

	

		

Wikipedia is not what most people think Wikipedia is. (Although I wonder to what degree these kinds of editorial issues are localized to a limited number of subject areas.)

With that in mind, this post didn't end the way I was expecting it to. (Which is a compliment.)

	

		Posted by:
		jme |
		[Friday, 07 September 2012 at 09:57 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2012/09/wikipedia-informed-roth-that-it-would-require-secondary-sources-to-verify-that-his-assertion-that-hi.html?cid=6a00d8341c2df453ef017d3be6e8eb970c#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef017d3be6e8eb970c)

[]()

	

		![tomemos](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/17-50si.gif)
	

	

		

I get the spirit of this but I think you're wrong at the end. If Roth had identified the book's inspiration in an interview, or a foreword to a new edition of the book, or something, that would surely have made it into Wikipedia. What does it matter that his essay was targeted directly at Wikipedia, rather than at the reading public as is usually the case?

	

		Posted by:
		[tomemos](http://tomemos.wordpress.com) |
		[Saturday, 08 September 2012 at 12:58 AM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2012/09/wikipedia-informed-roth-that-it-would-require-secondary-sources-to-verify-that-his-assertion-that-hi.html?cid=6a00d8341c2df453ef01774496bd34970d#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef01774496bd34970d)

[]()

	

		![bianca steele](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/01-50si.gif)
	

	

		

_Roth’s letter is an attempt to deny that the world in which he lives defines him. That also happens to be the central theme in The Human Stain._ 

Hi Scott:  

I read this at Lawyers, Guns, and Money but figure you're more likely to read a late comment here.

Do you really mean that first sentence--do you really mean that we can't distinguish Roth's inspiration in writing the book from how the book is read?  And that this is compatible with what Kakutani, Taylor, or Moore said?

I ask this fully agreeing that you have a point, and that Roth (not because writing about real people has come up with him before, not because I dislike Roth, but for more complicated reasons) is not the first person I'd defend on the point of not seeing the irony here.

Also, if you were going to distinguish intention from reception, how is Kakutani's review a secondary source?

	

		Posted by:
		[bianca steele](http://profile.typepad.com/bianca\_steele) |
		[Monday, 10 September 2012 at 07:00 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2012/09/wikipedia-informed-roth-that-it-would-require-secondary-sources-to-verify-that-his-assertion-that-hi.html?cid=6a00d8341c2df453ef017c31c76bf4970b#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef017c31c76bf4970b)

		

        