##  “We were told to ride out the storm, but it seems we were lied to[.]”  

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2012/09/-we-were-told-to-ride-out-the-storm-but-it-seems-we-were-lied-to-.html
 * Tuesday, September 11, 2012



That's a handsome quotation from the [_Inside Higher Ed_ article](http://www.insidehighered.com/news/2012/09/11/colorado-state-criticized-job-posting-favoring-recent-phds) about the Colorado State University ad [discussed yesterday](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/2012/09/whats-the-academese-for-no-fatties-why-do-i-need-to-know-no-reason-no-reason). From the article:

Louann Reid, chair of English at Colorado State, sees it 
differently.  When asked if the ad discriminated against adjuncts, she 
said her  department is seeking an entry-level professor with an 
entry-level  salary and expectations, and added that the posting was 
approved by the  university’s office of equal opportunity.

There's a strange disconnect because the question—does the ad 
discriminate against adjuncts?—and Reid's answer—the department wants to
 hire an entry-level professor with an entry-level salary and 
expectations. Do adjuncts not have entry-level salary expectations? 
Because I'm a short step above an adjunct and I can assure you that my 
salary expectations are entry-level. In a [response Chad Black's email](http://parezcoydigo.wordpress.com/2012/09/10/old-phds-need-not-apply/), Reid made clear the reasoning behind that disconnect:

By specifying "between 2010 and time of appointment" we 
indicated that  we are interested in applicants with up to three years 
in a tenure-track  position as well as those who are just beginning 
their careers.

So they want their pool of applicants to consist of (1) the fortunate
 few who landed a tenure-track position between 2005 and 2009 and (2) 
those people who happened to finish their doctorate after 2010. Notice 
who's absent from their ideal pool? _Everyone who wasn't fortunate enough to land a tenure-track position in the worst academic job market in recent memory_. It seems like Colorado State wants to punish [undeserving](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2007/12/you-dont-deserv.html) [scholars](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2007/12/i-wont-deserve.html)
 for the crimes of having to pay rent and eat during an economic 
downturn. But it's doubly cruel considering the fact that the hiring 
committees whose lines were plucked out from under them told applicants 
that the disappearance of the positions to which they'd applied wouldn't
 have any impact on their future in the profession. Because as this 
callous ad demonstrates, it clearly did. Colorado State thinks the fact 
that schools didn't have jobs to offer from 2005 to 2009 speaks poorly 
of applicants who failed to land non-existent jobs.

To which I can only say _nothing_ because we're in polite company.

**UPDATE:** Turns out sending pesky emails to the President of my professional organziation pays dividends:
In the Q&A, Bérubé said the CSU ad issue has been put on the MLA Exec Com agenda, and the MLA is un-approving the ad. @[scottekaufman](https://twitter.com/scottekaufman)

— Chad Black (@parezcoydigo) [September 11, 2012](https://twitter.com/parezcoydigo/status/245631345588588544)

		
