## Why are deaf people always laughing under their breath?

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2012/10/why-are-deaf-people-always-laughing-under-their-breath.html
 * Monday, October 22, 2012



Because every time our attention flags, this is what happens to the world:





For further reference, let me repeat what I wrote [_six years ago_](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/05/two\_posts\_writt.html) because I am old and write too much [[and am "only" about 90 percent deaf so I lip-read but still listen to music](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/2012/10/why-are-deaf-people-always-laughing-under-their-breath/comment-page-1#comment-375180)]:

I want to talk to you about staring at women's breasts.  I
 do it all the time.  I'll be standing there talking to a woman only to 
be stricken by the sudden and irresistible urge to stare at her breasts.
  She'll register her discomfort by pulling her lapels close or yanking 
her plunging neckline chin-high.  Then she'll become intensely 
interested in objects in the general vicinity of her feet.  But I won't 
let that deter me.  I'll continue to stare at her breasts until she 
won't be able to take it anymore and informs me in tones of suppressed 
outrage that she had some important elsewhere to be fifteen minutes ago.
  Then she'll never talk to me again.

Such is the experience of the deaf man in America today.  When the 
eyes of a hearing man break contact and wander south, the obvious 
conclusion is the correct one: he is staring at her breasts and she is 
justifiably uncomfortable.  When a deaf man who relies on verbal cues 
and lip-reading to converse lets his eyes drift south of his 
conversant's, he stops at her lips.  (You can tell because if he 
didn't—that is, if he actually stared at her breasts—he would have no 
clue how to answer whatever it is she would have said to him while he 
indulged in some "covert" sexism.)

Why mention this in the one forum this commonplace of deaf life will 
never make anyone uncomfortable?  Because I've acquired another rude 
habit:

Talking to people while wearing headphones.  People who know me—for 
example, Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist Barry Siegel—won't bat an eye
 when I talk to them with my headphones on because they'll know that I'm
 reading their lips and not paying attention to the music.  They'll know
 that I'm so invested in the conversation that I've forgotten that I 
have the headphones on and have merely neglected to remove them.  But 
other people—for example, the inimitable Gay Talese—will look at me 
horrified as I chat with Barry without removing my headphones.  His eyes
 will rebel against the solipsistic impertinence of youth culture he 
detects in my actions.

I register his discomfort but, blinded by reputation and desperately 
trying to impress him, I won't understand what it is I've said that so 
offends him.  I'll rifle my brain for the offensive statement the entire
 walk home and come up empty.  Only later that night, as I force myself 
to stop thinking about the events of the day, will I realize what I've 
done.  And then?

So much for sleep.
		
