## I <em>would</em> be a moral monster, were it not for...

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2012/09/i-would-be-a-moral-monster-were-it-not-for.html
 * Sunday, September 09, 2012



From a “hard-hitting” [interview with Gov. and Ms. Romney](http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/48959273/ns/meet\_the\_press-transcripts/t/september-mitt-romney-ann-romney-julian-castro-peggy-noonan-ej-dionne-bill-bennett-chuck-todd/):

**DAVID GREGORY:** There was something that 
caught my attention, I’m sure it caught yours  from the keynote speaker 
of the Democratic convention, which is—sort  of went to this charge that
 somehow neither one of you are as empathetic  about what’s going on in 
the country to people who are out of work. And the line was from from 
Julian Castro, the mayor of San Antonio,  “You just don’t know how good 
you’ve had it.”  How did that sit with  you?

**MS. ROMNEY:** The thing that I want to communicate to 
people, and that it’s so  important that people understand, is that Mitt
 and I do recognize that  we have not had a financial struggle in our 
lives.  But I want people to  believe in their hearts that we know what 
it is like to struggle.  And  our struggles have not been financial, but
 they’ve been with health and  with difficulties in different things in 
life.  And one thing that I again like to remind people is that multiple
 sclerosis has  been my teacher. It has been at times a cruel teacher. 
 But it has also been a great  gift in my life because what it has done 
it has taught me to be more  compassionate and caring for others that 
are suffering.  And I know that  people are suffering right now.  And 
for people to think that we don’t  have empathy just because we’re not 
suffering like they’re suffering  is ridiculous.

[Because life is a metaphor for baseball](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2007/09/baseball.html): Castro says that those born on third base don’t know how difficult it
 is to hit a triple. Ms. Romney responds by conceding that she doesn’t 
know what third base is and noting that standing in the warm summer sun 
is difficult too. Which it certainly is. Third base is a good place to 
be but by no means is it an inherently safe one. Most pitchers are 
right-handed so it’s easy to be picked off. Most batters are 
right-handed so when they pull the ball down the line hard and sharp 
you’re a target. And as Ms. Romney suggests, being on third base 
requires you to stand in the warm sun, meaning it’s possible that you’ll
 sunstroke or lock your knees and pass out or that swarms of angry 
hornets from the concessionary will ascend and attack you. That could 
happen. In fact it did happen to Ms. Romney:

She was standing on what she didn’t know was third base, minding her 
own business, when a small plane sucked a large duck into one of its 
propellers and caused a gruesome hail of engine and duck parts to rain 
down upon the field. A heavy metallic something brained Ms. Romney that 
fine summer afternoon and she’s spent the rest of her life finding it 
more difficult to stand on what she still doesn’t know is third base 
than she did before. This statistically improbable event introduced her 
to a concept with which she wouldn’t be familiar otherwise: 
suffering.

That’s a fine defense of her position so long as you don’t look too 
closely at what it entails: that everyone who’s born on third base but  
isn’t the victim of a statistically improbable event is _incapable of empathy_.
 Had it not been for multiple sclerosis she wouldn’t be able to 
understand the suffering of those not born on third. She’s confessing 
that she’s not like all those other sociopaths who neither understand 
the advantage of being born on third nor empathize with the struggles of
 those who weren’t. She’s admitting that people who think everyone’s 
parents can bankroll their children’s education or small business have 
neither understanding of nor empathy for the struggles and suffering of 
ordinary Americans.

In other words: by predicating her empathy on her multiple sclerosis,
 she unwittingly asserts that if she hadn’t been so stricken she’d be 
just as incapable of empathy as the man she married. They’d _both_ be standing on third base oblivious to the suffering in the stands and the struggles beyond the stadium walls.

		

* * *

### 3 Comments 

		

                
[]()

	

		![Ahistoricality](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/04-50si.gif)
	

	

		

There is no empathy in politics. 

Which is to say: American politics is a rhetoric of _authenticity_ in which complex or contradictory ideas cannot be openly admitted, even if one's experiences are complex or contradictory. 

You only get to be one kind of person. Unless you have a religious conversion experience; then you get a big, wet, do-over.

	

		Posted by:
		[Ahistoricality](http://ahistoricality.blogspot.com) |
		[Sunday, 09 September 2012 at 08:47 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2012/09/i-would-be-a-moral-monster-were-it-not-for.html?cid=6a00d8341c2df453ef017d3bf0906c970c#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef017d3bf0906c970c)

[]()

	

		![KWK](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/17-50si.gif)
	

	

		

No.  She's saying that _for her_, MS has helped her cultivate empathy.  There are an infinite number of life events that could induce one to be more compassionate; she's simply mentioning the one that is most relevant to her personally.  Whether or not she (and more importantly, her husband) are actually compassionate people who are advocating compassionate policies is a perfectly fair question, but you are trying to argue:  

which is obviously faulty.

	

		Posted by:
		KWK |
		[Sunday, 09 September 2012 at 09:54 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2012/09/i-would-be-a-moral-monster-were-it-not-for.html?cid=6a00d8341c2df453ef017d3bf0d3a0970c#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef017d3bf0d3a0970c)

[]()

	

		![Ahistoricality](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/04-50si.gif)
	

	

		

It's not "obviously" faulty unless "If C, then B" is also true. That's an arguable point, but it misses two things: first, she's said that _for her_, "If not A, then not B." Second, "not B" is true in the case of her husband, so "If not A or C, then not B" certainly is true _in her experience_.

Actually, I didn't come back to argue with KWK, but to reprint a comment I made at the other place, before it devolved into dramatic performative troll-baiting. (Which is, frankly, why I continue to comment here more often than there.)

I haven’t really spent a lot of time on the history of authenticity in American culture, but I don’t think we can blame this on the French.

It’s tied up with discourses of masculinity and evangelicalism, I think. With a good dose of Romanticism as the foundation (as so often the case with emotional modernisms).

This is more SEK’s bailiwick than mine; I’m a little surprised that he didn’t make the point himself.  

Anyway, this really is right in your strike zone, to push the metaphor even further, so take a swing?

	

		Posted by:
		[Ahistoricality](http://ahistoricality.blogspot.com) |
		[Sunday, 09 September 2012 at 11:21 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2012/09/i-would-be-a-moral-monster-were-it-not-for.html?cid=6a00d8341c2df453ef017c31c2e5d2970b#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef017c31c2e5d2970b)

		

        