## Ironically, she's not doing transwomen any justice.

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2013/04/ironically-shes-not-doing-transwomen-any-justice.html
 * Friday, April 12, 2013



I'm genuinely fond of [Gail Simone](http://www.imdb.com/name/nm2294487/)'s work—both in comics and combative internet forums—and I fully support [what she says](http://www.wired.com/underwire/2013/04/transgender-dc-comics-batgirl/?pid=9876) about the addition of a transwoman to the cast of _Batgirl_:

She added that she thinks most superhero comics readers 
don’t have a  problem with increased diversity, but rather with stories 
that promote  sermonizing over storytelling. Alysia will be “a 
character, not a public  service announcement … being trans is just part
 of her story. If  someone loved her before, and doesn’t love her after,
 well—that’s a  shame, but we can’t let that kind of thinking keep 
comics in the 1950s  forever.”

Except it's not "just part of her story," because it's just not part of _the_ story.
 It's an interruption in Barbara Gordon's issue-wide interior monologue.
 Because in this issue Gordon has quite a bit of confessing to do:

[![batgirl00a](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/batgirl00a.jpg "batgirl00a")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/batgirl00a.jpg)

You don't even need to enlarge the image to see that the majority of 
this conversation is filtered through Gordon's interior monologue—those 
black dialogue boxes speak for themselves. This is Gordon telling you a 
story about Gordon, which would be fine if this didn't happen:

[![batgirl00b](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/batgirl00b1.jpg "batgirl00b")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/batgirl00b1.jpg)

I admit to having edited out three panels of hugging and a close-up 
of that message-cat, but that doesn't detract from my larger point: 
Alysia's confession isn't an organic element of the narrative. It's 
utterly forced. Consider the first set off panels above: it's a series 
of two-shots emphasizing the bond between Barbara and Alysia that 
"transitions" to an unnecessarily dramatic close-up on Alysia. Because 
it's not as if Barbara's confession of having been paralyzed and 
tormented and stalked lacks emotional weight. Her burden is even 
indicated, visually, by the purple half-bat that haunts her words. She 
can't escape what's been done to her and who she is, not even when she's
 telling her own story to herself. Which, again, is all well and good. [I adore the confessional mode](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/08/modautobiograph.html)
 so long as it doesn't involve Don Draper talking about swimming. But a 
narrative written in the confessional mode simply isn't the best place 
to have someone other than the confessor make a grand gesture. My 
editorial work above may be a little dishonest, but it's certainly 
indicative of the issue's overall narrative emphasis. If Simone wanted 
to have Alysia's moment be hers, she should've placed it in a narrative 
that didn't belong to Barbara Gordon, because that makes it seem like an
 afterthought.

And that only provides more ammunition to [people who think](http://www.breitbart.com/Big-Hollywood/2013/04/10/Batgirl-Comic-Character-Comes-Out-as-Transgender)
 "cis-gendered" is just "another one of those terms invented in 
universities aimed at  eliminating the word “normal” when discussing 
sexual preferences." Because people who think DC is pushing an LGBT 
agenda will feel like its being "shoved down their throat" when 
revelations like this are inserted into narratives so awkwardly. That 
close-up pushes Alysia into the reader's face in a manner liable to 
remind readers that [the forced intimacy of _all_ close-ups is actually really creepy](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2012/09/game-of-thrones-winter-is-coming-.html),
 and when it comes to rhetorical effect, the difference between "shoved 
down my throat" and "thrust in my face" is without distinction.

		
