## Michelle Malkin loves a “Weatherman with a tan,” “has a herpe” (or How <em>Twitchy</em> “works”)

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2013/04/michelle-malkin-loves-a-weatherman-with-a-tan-has-a-herpe.html
 * Friday, April 19, 2013



I’m beginning to understand why Michelle Malkin and “The Twitchy 
Staff” publish everything under the byline “The Twitchy Staff.” If I 
blamed [a missing person for the Boston bombing on account of him being mentioned on a police scanner while wearing a Che t-shirt](http://twitchy.com/2013/04/19/boston-marathon-suspect-sunil-tripathi-in-a-che-guevara-t-shirt/), I wouldn’t want my name directly associated with it either. Or with stories like “[We’re pretty sure Dzohokhar Tsarnaev is _not_ Tweeting](http://twitchy.com/2013/04/19/were-pretty-sure-dzhokhar-tsarnaev-is-not-tweeting/),” which carry all the authority of a poorly sourced rumor _just in case_
 it really happens to be him so that Malkin can engage in some 
blog-triumphalism if the improbable turns out to be true. Would Malkin 
do this under her own name? _Of course not_. As proof I offer as evidence that she hasn’t. [It _looks_ like she has](http://michellemalkin.com/2013/04/19/rampage-boston-marathon-suspects-mike-mulugeta-and-sunil-tripathi-in-late-night-crime-spree-gunfight-chase/),
 but a quick read of that post shifts all potential blame where she 
wants it: on the “Twitchy Team.” Who’s responsible for this 
irresponsible speculation? [One of these people](http://twitchy.com/about/). Which one?

Wouldn’t you like to know.

But you never will, because the site’s designed to facilitate 
irresponsibility. Despite all Malkin’s proud declarations about the 
importance of citizen journalists, in the end she’d rather hide, like 
the coward she is, beyond an anonymous byline because she knows 
“mistakes were and will be made.” How does she know? Because _that’s the point_
 of the entire site. She’s free to publish anything she’d like without 
having to worry about annoying things like “consequences,” because not 
only is she not directly responsible for what she’s published, she’s 
merely aggregating what other people have written on Twitter. It’s a 
perpetual bullshit machine powered by anonymity. She can take credit for
 its “findings” when some infernal occlusion causes it to belch out 
something accurate, but for the most part she denies via “UPDATE” the 
endless stream of bullshit it was designed to produce.

This is a more sophisticated version of the long-standing tradition 
among conservative bloggers of denying-without-denouncing the sexism and
 racism and homophobia and xenophobia of their readers. The bloggers are
 merely exercising their right to speak freely about their conservative 
values and extending their readers the same opportunity. When those 
readers inevitably reveal themselves to be within earshot of the 
whistle, these same bloggers claim to have _no idea where all these dogs came from_.
 The problem with this approach is that eventually the stench of urine 
sticks to bloggers who quietly encourage their readers to lift their leg
 on the America dream. So Malkin created a forum where figuring out 
where that smell’s coming from is as difficult as distinguishing one 
yellow stain from another — we certainly can’t blame _her_ for the mess or the miasma.

But I think we can. I think we should force Malkin to take 
responsibility for the state of her house. She wants to shift the blame 
to her roommates or their friends _but her name is on the deed_. 
Anything they do or say is ultimately attributable to her. (Hence the 
title of this post.) I normally wouldn’t make such an insistence, but 
since her site is designed to allow her an unconscionable deniability, 
I’m not sure what choice we have.

		
