## Seriously, about that <em>Rolling Stone</em> cover

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2013/07/seriously-about-that-rolling-stone-cover.html
 * Friday, July 19, 2013



I was [initially dismissive](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/2013/07/about-that-rolling-stone-cover) of the “controversy” concerning the latest _Rolling Stone_ cover because it originated from people making arguments [like this](http://www.breitbart.com/Big-Hollywood/2013/07/17/celebs-decry-rolling-stone-cover-choice):

The cover of _Rolling Stone_ was once reserved for
 the newest bands, the hottest singer-songwriters or the pop culture 
phenoms grabbing the country by the scruff of its neck.

Christian Toto, the author of this one, strikes me as one of those 
“internet researchers” whose store of knowledge consists of ideas 
half-mastered and mistakenly remembered, the sort that require a quick 
search to “confirm” that _Rolling Stone_ is “about” music. He has
 no personal connection with or real knowledge of the magazine and 
doesn’t desire any. This lack of intellectual curiosity is made manifest
 in the rest of his post, which consists of quoting “celebrities” like 
Ralph Macchio re-tweeting the sage words of “one of the creative forces 
behind HBO’s _Entourage_.” The limitations of such critics notwithstanding, they accidentally stumbled over a solid point. To quote [joe from lowell](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/2013/07/about-that-rolling-stone-cover/comment-page-1#comment-598621):

The picture they chose to make the cover of Rolling Stone
 looks too much  like a rock star. It looks like a zillion Rolling Stone
 covers we’ve  all seen. The graphic designers were clearly going for 
that “ordinary,  attractive person is really a monster” effect that the 
text describes,  but they picked the wrong pic. The photo doesn’t read 
as “ordinary,  attractive person who might live next door,” but as “the 
latest pop star  Rolling Stone wants to promote.” It gets in the way of 
what they were  trying to do and muddles the message. They should have 
used a photo in  which he looked a little goofy, or a photo of him at 
eight years old,  instead.

The criticism here isn’t that a lowly music magazine is breaking from
 routine and lionizing Tsarnaev — it’s an aesthetic judgment that 
acknowledges what _Rolling Stone_ tried and failed to do. The 
difference, in other words, between conservative and aesthetic critics 
of the image is that only the latter are capable of correctly assessing 
its intent and judging its effectiveness. Conservative critics 
legitimately believe that _Rolling Stone_‘s trying to disseminate
 images of dreamy Islamic radicalism to impressionable American youths, 
whereas aesthetic critics can read the words beneath the image and 
understand that the cover fails rhetorically. I think Other Scott [need not fear the progeny of strange bedfellows](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/2013/07/that-settles-it-2)
 — this is just the most recent case of deliberate conservative 
misprision. They see what they want to, so when they look at the _Rolling Stone_ cover, instead of seeing what’s printed:

[![rolling stone02](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/rolling-stone02.jpg "rolling stone02")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/rolling-stone02.jpg)

They see what’s politically convenient:

[![rolling stone03](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/rolling-stone03.jpg "rolling stone03")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/rolling-stone03.jpg)

The context is still _technically_ there, but it’s rendered 
inscrutable by the controversial imperative: “Act only according to that
 maxim whereby you can, at the same time, will that all should become 
offended by a universal flaw.” Defining the entire cover down to 
Tsarnaev’s self-portrait — treating it as if the words didn’t exist — 
allowed conservatives to circulate an ahistorical and acontextual 
version of it that’s offensive to everyone. Much like the fight between 
Trayvon Martin and George Zimmerman began when Martin landed his first 
blow, conservatives have managed to bracket the conversation about this 
“controversy” such that the image being discussed is, by and large, the 
second one above. Having done so, they can rally their cultural warriors
 against the Shariah-loving editorial board of _Rolling Stone_ with the usual dishonest gusto.

But liberal and aesthetic critics should have sense enough to realize
 that the problem with this cover wasn’t in its intent so much as its 
execution. In all honesty, I don’t think _Rolling Stone_ should 
be criticized for its visual-rhetorical failure here, but for rehashing 
the tired trope of “The Monster Next Door.” That’s [Keith Morrison](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Keith\_Morrison)‘s bailiwick, and Saturday mornings on MSNBC would be infinitely poorer if _Rolling Stone_ put him out of business.

		
