## How science becomes "fact" in conservative circles

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2013/04/how-science-becomes-fact-in-conservative-circles.html
 * Friday, April 05, 2013



On March 30th, _The Economist_ published “[Climate science: A sensitive matter](http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21574461-climate-may-be-heating-up-less-response-greenhouse-gas-emissions/),”
 in which James Hansen, formerly of NASA, noted that “the five-year mean
 global temperature has been flat for a decade.” The article then 
outlines the many ways in which the scientific community is attempting 
to account for the fact that the mean global temperature is “already at 
the low end of the range of projections derived from 20 climate models.”
 Different models are consulted, other mechanisms suggested, alternate 
sensitivities proposed, _i.e._ science happens.

Or, as Rich Lowry [wrote](http://www.nationalreview.com/articles/344426/new-climate-deniers-rich-lowry) at the _National Review_
 on April 2nd, “[i]n other words, the scientific ‘consensus’ [has] been 
proven wrong.” Granted, he actually writes that the consensus “will have
 been proven wrong” if the mean global temperature remains flat “for a 
few more years,” but that’s a difference without distinction. First, 
because he declares himself arbiter of a scientific consensus he doesn’t
 understand; second, because he chooses the scientifically precise date 
of “a few more years” before the consensus he doesn’t understand will be
 invalidated; and third, because he’s drawing the conclusion that “the 
‘sensitivity’ of the global climate to carbon emissions has been 
overestimated” despite the fact that his own article contains a 
paragraph about factors that might be _mitigating_ warming. He 
tacitly admits that carbon emissions may still have a warming effect, 
it’s just that, for example, “new coal-fired plants in China and India, 
releasing so-called aerosols  into the atmosphere that act to suppress 
warming, may be partly  responsible for the stasis in temperatures.”

Which is only to repeat myself: he’s writing about a science he 
doesn’t understand; moreover, he’s doing so from a position of ignorance
 so profound he doesn’t even realize his arguments might be entirely 
compatible. In the same way that I can be both an athlete and a writer, 
so too can carbon emissions be pushing temperatures up while aerosols 
drive them down. Arguing that X doesn’t do Y because A does B isn’t much
 of an argument.

Unfortunately, he’s sharing his misunderstanding of logic and science in the influential pages of the _National Review_,
 which means that despite the fact that he misrepresents processes he 
doesn’t understand, his conclusion will shortly acquire the status of 
received wisdom as it’s repeated, in ever more ignorant forms, by other 
writers in the pages of the _National Review_. For example, today Victor Davis Hanson [wrote](http://www.nationalreview.com/corner/344822/two-views-state-nation-victor-davis-hanson)
 “[t]he global warming hysteria—with no measurable planet warming in the
 last  15 years despite sizable increases in carbon emissions—is 
abating[.]” His evidence? He doesn’t need to cite evidence.

Lowry already established this new conclusion as a fact.

Which means I can propose my own new theory: based on the evidence 
above, conservatives require six days to transform science into stupid 
and stupid into ideology. I less-than-eagerly await the inevitable proof
 of my error.

		
