## <em>The Dark Knight Returns</em> and The Zack Snyder School of Literal Filmmaking

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2013/06/the-dark-knight-returns-and-the-zak-snyder-school-of-literal-filmmaking.html
 * Sunday, June 23, 2013



Not wanting to spend the entirety of my life figuring out how to put 
the entirety of my life into boxes and move it across the country, I 
decided to watch the animated adaptation of Frank Miller’s [_The Dark Knight Returns_](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1563893428/diesekoschmar-20). Directed by Jay Olivia and released in two parts in [2012](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B008RV5K4U/diesekoschmar-20) and [2013](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00A2LFXVI/diesekoschmar-20), it belongs to [the Zack Snyder School of Literal Filmmaking](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2009/03/watching-watchmen-how-unfilmable-novels-become-unwatchable-films.html),
 in which the idea is to replicate particularly stirring comic panels on
 the big screen by unwittingly mangling the elements that make them 
stirring.

Consider Snyder’s adaptation of _Watchmen_. We don’t even need
 to venture past the opening credits to see where the film misses the 
point. But before we do that, I should note that I’m _not_ complaining
 generally about a lack of faithfulness in adaptation. Comics and film 
are different media and ought to be treated as such. I don’t mind if 
changes are made that alter the narrative in an interesting fashion. But
 Snyder preaches fidelity as his ethos, so taken at his word, deviations
 from the comic in his films aren’t “interesting alterations” so much as
 the “necessary accommodations” of adapting any medium into another. 
These changes are being made by a lover of the source material who would
 never be unfaithful to the “spirit” of the original. For what it’s 
worth, I think Snyder’s dead honest about his commitment to accurately 
representing both individual panels and the “spirit” of the original 
work on screen — he simply happens to be terrible at doing so. Back to 
the opening minutes of _Watchmen_, in which Rorschach’s 
investigating the Comedian’s murder. Both the novel and the film begin 
with a close-up of the Comedian’s iconic image before pulling back to 
the skyscraper window from which it fell.

Book:

[![watchmen01](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/watchmen01-642x1024.jpg "watchmen01")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/watchmen01.jpg)

Film:

[![mad men - the quality of mercy00126](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/mad-men-the-quality-of-mercy00126.png "mad men - the quality of mercy00126")![mad men - the quality of mercy00133](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/mad-men-the-quality-of-mercy00133.png "mad men - the quality of mercy00133")![mad men - the quality of mercy00194](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/mad-men-the-quality-of-mercy00194.png "mad men - the quality of mercy00194")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/mad-men-the-quality-of-mercy00194.png)

I’ve turned on the subtitles in order to make the difference between 
the novel and the film clear. Although both pull back to great heights, 
in the novel the emphasis during the slow transition from the ground 
floor to the Comedian’s apartment is on the content of Rorschach’s 
journal. You can tell because it occupies a little more than a third of 
the first three panels _and_ the other visual information is 
merely repetitive. This isn’t necessarily the case when a camera zooms 
out — and readers of the novel recognize that there is relevant 
information in the third panel — but in this case seeing some anonymous 
man walk through the pool of blood isn’t necessarily useful information.
 (Readers _might_ associate the anhedonic tone of the journal and
 the callousness with which the redheaded man walks through the pool of 
blood, but who among us was that clever at eleven?)

Point being: Snyder’s made the minor directorial decision to move the
 interior narration of the journal to when Rorschach actually appears:

[![mad men - the quality of mercy00158](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/mad-men-the-quality-of-mercy00158.png "mad men - the quality of mercy00158")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/mad-men-the-quality-of-mercy00158.png)[![mad men - the quality of mercy00160](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/mad-men-the-quality-of-mercy00160.png "mad men - the quality of mercy00160")![mad men - the quality of mercy00224](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/mad-men-the-quality-of-mercy00224.png "mad men - the quality of mercy00224")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/mad-men-the-quality-of-mercy00224.png)[![mad men - the quality of mercy00225](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/mad-men-the-quality-of-mercy00225.png "mad men - the quality of mercy00225")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/mad-men-the-quality-of-mercy00225.png)[![mad men - the quality of mercy00229](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/mad-men-the-quality-of-mercy00229.png "mad men - the quality of mercy00229")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/mad-men-the-quality-of-mercy00229.png)[![mad men - the quality of mercy00208](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/mad-men-the-quality-of-mercy00208.png "mad men - the quality of mercy00208")![mad men - the quality of mercy00213](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/mad-men-the-quality-of-mercy00213.png "mad men - the quality of mercy00213")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/mad-men-the-quality-of-mercy00213.png)

Same lines from the first panel of the comic, they’ve just been 
shifted forward to remove the mystery of their author. There’s just one 
problem: in the film, the implication is that Rorschach’s thinking about
 the awfulness of the city when he discovers the Comedian’s badge. His 
behavior’s motivated by his disdain for the people he deigns to protect.
 His anger drives his actions in a very conventional manner: this man 
named, clearly identified as Rorschach, is a moralistic vigilante who 
prowls the streets at night preventing crime, picking up shit from sewer
 drains and inexplicably using grappling guns. He’s in a mood — the only
 one he ever has — and he happens to find something that sets him off 
again. Not so much in the novel:

[![watchmen06](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/watchmen06.jpg "watchmen06")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/watchmen06.jpg)

Notice how quiet Moore and Gibbons’ panels are. By shifting the 
narration from the zoom out to Rorschach’s discovery of the Comedian’s 
pin, Snyder’s demonstrated that he fundamentally misread those three 
panels. The point of them — which will be made more strongly shortly — 
is to establish Rorschach’s skills as a detective. It’s too easy to turn
 a character of Rorschach’s pedigree into a mindless vigilante, which is
 why Moore and Gibbons use _Watchmen_‘s opening pages to 
establish his credentials as a detective. He finds evidence of the 
Comedian on the street; stares it down in attempt to ascertain where it 
came from; then decides it must have fallen. Only then does he look up 
at the building. It’s a slow and contemplative progression of panels 
that the film turns into an minor action sequence complete with “all the
 [drowning].” And of course once Rorschach arrives on scene:

[![watchmen07](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/watchmen07.jpg "watchmen07")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/watchmen07.jpg)

He says nothing, because he’s investigating. He’s thinking _his own thoughts_
 about what he sees. If he had a Watson or a Wilson or a companion he’d 
be vigorously shushing them at this point because he needs to think. In 
the film?

[![mad men - the quality of mercy00170](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/mad-men-the-quality-of-mercy00170.png "mad men - the quality of mercy00170")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/mad-men-the-quality-of-mercy00170.png)[![mad men - the quality of mercy00173](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/mad-men-the-quality-of-mercy00173.png "mad men - the quality of mercy00173")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/mad-men-the-quality-of-mercy00173.png)

He’s thinking that _right there_ as he’s perched in the 
window. He’s not being an effective detective — he’s being a bitter 
blogger stuck doing something else but silently composing posts he’ll 
write when he gets the chance. Even though they made the juxtaposition 
of the journal clear when he first opened his mouth by having him 
“think-read” “Rorschach’s journal, October 12, 1985,” the manner in 
which Snyder uses the non-diegetic voice-over in the scene makes it 
appear to be a interior monologue, right down to the emphatic 
eighties-action-hero-overstatement of his final “No.”

It’s actually a little more complex than that. Interior monologues 
are typically considered to be non-diegetic — in that they don’t come 
from a source visible on-screen — but I’d argue that, in film generally,
 they’re diegetic inasmuch as they are coming from a visible source, _e.g._ I
 can see Rorschach’s head and think I’m hearing his thoughts as he’s 
having them. Which is why this is a little complex: he’s not actually 
thinking the thoughts the audience is attributing to him, unless he’s 
got an perfect recall and is reciting his journal to himself. _In 1985. Or possibly later if this is a flashback_.
 All of which is only to demonstrate how needlessly complicated Snyder’s
 made this scene in order to streamline it: now Rorschach’s journal is 
introduced while he arrives at the Comedian’s apartment. He thinks 
nothing’s lost by transposing Rorschach’s mad rantings onto his work as a
 detective. He’s wrong.

The point of keeping Rorschach’s journal distinct from his detective 
work in the opening pages is to create, in the mind of the audience, a 
distinction between the man and the mask. The man, Walter Kovacs, is a 
violent sociopath; the mask, Rorschach, can channel the man’s tendencies
 into productive policing and temper his violence. This distinction 
indicates that he’s going to be a character whose psychological state is
 difficult to read. It’s almost like people will see what they want to 
see in him because _he’s wearing a fucking Rorschach test_. By 
which I only mean to suggest that despite his fidelity to the panels, 
Synder’s missed the entire point of the scene in order to make it more 
conventional. That’s why his Rorschach says quite a bit more than Moore 
and Gibbon’s:

[![Watchmen 0108](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/Watchmen-0108-650x1024.jpg "Watchmen 0108")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/Watchmen-0108.jpg)

Rorschach’s “HUNH” and “EHH” are thinking noises of the sort people 
make when lost deep in thought. In the third panel, Rorschach recognizes
 that the size of the interior of the closet seems odd; in the fourth, 
he improvises a means of measuring the closet’s depth; in the fifth he 
measures the exterior; in the sixth he measures the interior. And Moore 
and Gibbons are clever enough to emphasize the crook in the hanger. It’s
 literally in the dead center of the fifth panel — meaning [it’s in the dead center of a page scripted by Alan Moore and therefore quite important](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2009/02/like-what-i-did-with-the-dark-knight-only-this-time-about-the-fourth-issue-of-watchmenin-making-comics-scott-mccloud-argue.html):

[![watchmen08](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/watchmen08.jpg "watchmen08")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/watchmen08.jpg)

Only when he compares the location of the crook on the interior in 
panel six does Rorschach realize that there’s a secret compartment. 
These panels are evidence of a process of deduction at work. He’s more 
than a vigilante obsessed with a citizenry slipping into sin — he’s a 
proper detective who’s capable of improvisation in the course of his 
investigations. Or he opens a random closet, slides the clothes aside 
and sees a button:

[![rorschach](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/rorschach.png "rorschach")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/rorschach.png)

Then he presses it. Great work there Detective Rorschach! Not sure 
how you thought of that! I think my point is obvious: Snyder may be 
faithful to the design elements of particular panels, but more often 
than not he entirely misreads the significance of the work he slavishly 
imitates. Now that I’ve established that, I can say that a similar 
dynamic is at work in _The Dark Knight Returns_: panels from the 
graphic novel appear on the screen in a manner that demonstrates the 
Olivia, the director, didn’t quite understand their import. Consider 
this action sequence in which the Batman runs across a tightrope from 
one building to another:

[![mad men - the quality of mercy00295](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/mad-men-the-quality-of-mercy00295.png "mad men - the quality of mercy00295")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/mad-men-the-quality-of-mercy00295.png)

Is shot square in his symbol and staggers:

[![mad men - the quality of mercy00300](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/mad-men-the-quality-of-mercy00300.png "mad men - the quality of mercy00300")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/mad-men-the-quality-of-mercy00300.png)

Begins to fall:

[![mad men - the quality of mercy00310](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/mad-men-the-quality-of-mercy00310.png "mad men - the quality of mercy00310")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/mad-men-the-quality-of-mercy00310.png)

Then fires his grappling gun at an escaping helicopter:

[![mad men - the quality of mercy00318](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/mad-men-the-quality-of-mercy00318.png "mad men - the quality of mercy00318")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/mad-men-the-quality-of-mercy00318.png)

This sequence seems like typical heat-of-the-moment Batman: expensive
 body armor and years of training allow him to routinely do the 
impossible. He doesn’t need to think — he’s a man of pure reaction. Even
 after all these years of _not_ being the Batman — the word 
“Returns” is in the title for a reason — his instincts allow him to act 
unconsciously. Such is the impression created by the adaptation. One 
problem: although that last capture above does reproduce [an iconic silent splash page](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/BatmanTDKR1\_052\_The\_Dark\_Knight\_Returns.jpg), the rest of those panels should sound, via interior monologue, like this:

[![BATMAN01](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/BATMAN01.png "BATMAN01")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/BATMAN01.png)[![BATMAN02](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/BATMAN02.png "BATMAN02")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/BATMAN02.png)[![BATMAN03](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/BATMAN03.png "BATMAN03")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/BATMAN03.png)

Whereas with Rorschach there should’ve been _no_ interior monologue, in _The Dark Knight Returns_ there
 should have been. The point of the book is that Batman’s falling off 
buildings worried about having a heart attack and trying to console 
himself on the dignity of his impending death. Those are very 
un-Batman-like things to be thinking in the middle of a fight. 
Eliminating the interior monologue has reduced him to his body — which I
 grant is the point of many a Batman story, _e.g._ Bruce Wayne escaping the vaguely Asian pit in _The Dark Knight Rises_. It’s just not the point of this one. It’s the _opposite_
 of the point. But as with Synder, the desire to be faithful to the 
original work has resulted in something utterly different and more 
mundane. I led with the discussion of Rorschach because I don’t want 
people to assume that I’m making the common criticism that comics handle
 interiority better than film because we can “see” people think in them.
 That’s not the point — especially not with a Frank Miller book, since 
the tone of the interior monologue comes straight from film noir’s 
tradition of voice-overs — which, of course, comes from the first person
 perspective of the detective novels on which they were based, but 
that’s not the point either. The point here is that the films of two of 
the greatest graphic novels of the 1980s are both significantly worse 
than they have to be because they were adapted by people _who fundamentally didn’t understand how they worked_.

They’re the equivalent of a parrot trained to greet visitors with a hearty “Hello! Good to see you!” It doesn’t have _a fucking clue what it’s saying_ but somehow we’re convinced we hear language.

		
