## Representations of rape in comic books

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2013/03/representations-of-rape-in-comics.html
 * Wednesday, March 27, 2013



[_I'm [re-posting this](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/06/comic\_book\_rape.html) because I received an email on [my earlier post](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/2013/03/game-of-thrones-only-anime)
 inquiring as to whether "cartoons" are capable of tackling difficult 
social issues responsibly. I think this old post demonstrates how 
something as ostensibly slight as a "cartoon" can have a profound impact
 on a person's moral development_.]

The year was 1988. I was a recent transplant to Louisiana and a  tad on the introverted side. ([What with being deaf and all](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/05/two\_posts\_writt.html).)
 So I spent endless hours reading comic  books. I may have “like ‘em 
liked” some girls at this point, but can find no  evidence of it in my 
fourth grade yearbook. Not only did I know nothing about girls, I 
distinctly remember not even knowing what this “rape” thing I heard 
about on the news  was. But I mowed my lawn every day—my father having 
decided to instill  the value of hard work by allowing me to earn $4 
whenever I wanted by re-mowing what my new work ethic transformed into a
 hilariously mangy lawn—and so I had plenty of money to blow on X-books.
 Meaning I spent most afternoons  blissfully unaware of anything that 
didn’t involve the _X-Men_ or _X-Factor_ or _The New Mutants_ or, if I was desperate enough, _Alpha Flight_.

One late October afternoon, I purchase a copy of _X-Men_ #236. On [the cover](http://acephalous.typepad.com/01.jpg)
 Wolverine and Rogue are hung by their feet from a scaffold, flanked on 
both  sides by grinning fools in military garb. (This image disturbs me 
 more now than it did then.) What had happened? The X-Men had sacrificed
 themselves to save the world, only in the end they were granted a 
reprieve: they would be dead _to the world_ but  would live 
undetected and undetectable in the Australian outback. They  were 
invisible to all forms of electronic recording devices. They were  able 
to move throughout the world invisible to all by the naked eye. Or so 
they thought until a fascist state called “Genosha” declared war on 
them. To make a long story short: shit hit fans. Wolverine and Rogue 
were captured.

For those unfamiliar with the comics or the films, Rogue has the  
power to absorb the memories and/or mutant powers of whomever she  
touches. So, naturally, she doesn’t touch anyone for fear of knocking  
them unconscious and draining them of their “life energy.”__ Her 
entire life Rogue  has wanted nothing more than to touch someone without
 hurting them. To  be loved. But she’d come to accept the fact that this
 would never  happen. This self-sacrifice moved my fourth-grade mind. I 
sympathized  with her despite having no clue as to what she sacrificed 
or why. I  only knew that it pained her and, being the good sympathetic 
identifier that I was,  I felt her pain by proxy. So without really 
knowing why, I wanted Rogue to  be able to touch people.

And after she’s captured by the Genoshans, she’s stripped of her 
mutant  powers. Now she can touch people without having to worry about 
killing  them. For a moment, I’m happy for her. If only she can get out 
of this  jam she’ll be able to touch someone! That’s all she ever 
wanted! Then I  hit this panel:

![image](http://acephalous.typepad.com/upload13.jpg)

And  I was confused. That’s Rogue huddled there in the corner. She’s 
 traumatized. Over the next few issues she’ll disappear. Another  
personality—and I mean that literally—will emerge. Rogue will be so  
hurt by whatever “liberties [were] taken when she was being processed”  
that she’ll cede control of her psyche to [Carol Danvers](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carol\_Danvers).
 (Read the link.  It’s too complicated to explain briefly.) Needless to 
 say, despite not knowing quite what those “liberties” were, countless  
data points began to constellate for me. I saw “touching” and “forced”  
and “fascism” and “liberties” circle the pained figure in the panel  
above and I was confused. Angry. Upset. I didn’t know why, but I knew 
that I was. My sympathies had identified with something they couldn’t  
comprehend.

When [I was hit by that car](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2006/05/why\_i\_didnt\_pos.html)
 and pain plus medication turned my  mind to cottage cheese, the most 
“intellectual” material I could  stomach were comics. Re-reading this 
one, I stumbled into a  realization: my feminist sympathies were first 
marshaled while reading  a comic back in the Autumn of ’88. The medium 
is far from perfect, but it’s not wholly without value.  I’m not 
defending  myself here so much as describing a stage in my development. 
So please  don’t read this and think “Scott think spandex is _progressive_?” I don’t. Only once upon a time, it inadvertently was.

		
