## <em>Mad Men</em>: Now, where were we exactly?

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2013/04/mad-men-now-where-were-we-exactly.html
 * Sunday, April 07, 2013



To celebrate what’s going to be a very _Mad Men_ week at _Lawyers, Guns & Money_—at least two posts by me and a podcast starring an illustrious cast of 
thousands—I thought it’d be good to remind everyone where we left off.
 (And by “everyone” I probably mean “me,” as I need to pick up threads 
I’ve forgotten about in the intervening months.) So here’s where we left
 off (plus a little coda) according to Yours Truly:

		

					[]()
			

My [previous post](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/2012/06/mad-men-nostalgia-forestalled-and-the-wheel),
  on “The Wheel,” discussed in great detail the relationship of Don  
Draper to his past via the fading photographs of him and Betty and the  
children. “Nostalgia,” Draper says,”literally means pain from an old  
wound.” The “twinge” Don describes to the Kodak Eastman people is tinged
  with sadness—the life projected on the wall is one his actions have  
destroyed—but it is also a pain that’s tempered by the knowledge that it
  can be compartmentalized. The Kodak Carousel is more than a projector:
  the titular wheel effectively functions as a container for captured  
moments that can be opened and reexperienced at a whim _or_ it  
can be a simple storage device for memories a person wants to know are  
safely preserved. This second person doesn’t necessarily want to  
reexperience their lives one twinge at a time, but the thought of being 
 unable to do so could cause a pain unmitigated by memory. This would be
 a  powerful pain, a constant reminder of itself by virtue of its 
absence.  In “The Wheel,” Don feels remorse for transforming the family 
projected  on the wall into something that evokes no more than the 
twinge of  memory. He claims that twinge is “more powerful than memory 
alone,” but  clearly it isn’t.

In the fifth season finale, “The Phantom,” directed, like “The  
Wheel,” by Matt Weiner, the problem with Don’s definition of nostalgia  
is immediately challenged by, of all things, a toothache:

[![Mad men - the phantom00037](http://acephalous.typepad.com/.a/6a00d8341c2df453ef017615d82bb7970c-500wi "Mad men - the phantom00037")](http://acephalous.typepad.com/.a/6a00d8341c2df453ef017615d82bb7970c-popup)

But his toothache isn’t an ordinary toothache. As his dentist informs
  him later in the episode, his tooth had formed an abscess, which means
  that its core has become rotten and the tooth must be pulled. It’s an 
 absence that can only be treated by the creation of a larger _controllable_ absence.
  Early in “The Phantom,” the abscess functions as a physical  
manifestation of the guilt Don feels about his complicity in the suicide
  of Lane Pryce in “[Commission and Fees](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/2012/06/mad-men-hands-and-hands-and-hands-in-commissions-and-fees).” Weiner signals as much in the form of the phantom that accompanies Don’s pain:

[![Mad men - the phantom00012](http://acephalous.typepad.com/.a/6a00d8341c2df453ef017742bdf695970d-500wi "Mad men - the phantom00012")](http://acephalous.typepad.com/.a/6a00d8341c2df453ef017742bdf695970d-popup)  

[![Mad men - the phantom00012](http://acephalous.typepad.com/.a/6a00d8341c2df453ef017615d83b65970c-500wi "Mad men - the phantom00012")](http://acephalous.typepad.com/.a/6a00d8341c2df453ef017615d83b65970c-popup)

The reverse from Don’s swollen jaw and tired eyes to Adam’s calm and 
 open face connects the pain to its source: Lane’s the second person who
  came to Don for help and, after being turned away, committed suicide. 
 Don can feel a “twinge” of nostalgia for the family he fathered under  
his assumed identity, but his feelings for his younger brother, Adam  
Whitman, are complicated by the fact that he tried to store them in a  
wheel he knew he’d never attach to a Carousel. Adam had been stored and 
 compartmentalized, incapable of causing a “twinge,” at least unil 
Lane’s  suicide forces Don to remember his complicity in Adam’s. In 
keeping  with the carousel as a central image, Don’s abscessed tooth is 
the  equivalent of being forced to watch Adam meet his end _a la_

[![CLOCKWORK\_ORANGE\_011404\_20100124\_00](http://acephalous.typepad.com/.a/6a00d8341c2df453ef017615d84bdc970c-500wi "CLOCKWORK\_ORANGE\_011404\_20100124\_00")](http://acephalous.typepad.com/.a/6a00d8341c2df453ef017615d84bdc970c-popup)

Once he questions his role in Lane’s death, Don is incapable of  
thinking about his life in the neatly compartmentalized way to which  
he’d become accustomed. He can’t drink away the pain of his abscessed  
tooth any more than he can stop seeing his brother’s phantom. When does 
 Adam phantom’s disappear? When Don goes to the dentist, which he only  
does after realizing that he’s dangerously close to losing someone else:

[![Mad men - the phantom00069](http://acephalous.typepad.com/.a/6a00d8341c2df453ef017742be150f970d-500wi "Mad men - the phantom00069")](http://acephalous.typepad.com/.a/6a00d8341c2df453ef017742be150f970d-popup)

Megan petitions her miserable husband to score her an audition on one
  of his commercials, but he refuses, telling her that it’s “better to 
be  somebody’s discovery than somebody’s wife.” He later returns home to
  find her sprawled on the couch, too drunk to stand:

[![Mad men - the phantom00041](http://acephalous.typepad.com/.a/6a00d8341c2df453ef016767e324b4970b-500wi "Mad men - the phantom00041")](http://acephalous.typepad.com/.a/6a00d8341c2df453ef016767e324b4970b-popup)

For the first time, he realizes that she’s veering dangerously close 
 to being “somebody’s discovery,” only that person would be more like  
Pete Campbell:

[![Mad men - commissions and fees00071](http://acephalous.typepad.com/.a/6a00d8341c2df453ef017742be210c970d-500wi "Mad men - commissions and fees00071")](http://acephalous.typepad.com/.a/6a00d8341c2df453ef017742be210c970d-popup)

And it wouldn’t be Megan he’d discovered, only her body.  Don  
recognizes in Megan what he missed in the days before Adam and Lane  
killed themselves: the spoken desire to find and maintain a place in the
  world. He’d denied that to Adam and undermined Lane of his, but now he
  is confronted by his wife, who insists that if he doesn’t help her,  
she’s only valuable for one thing:

[![Mad men - the phantom00068](http://acephalous.typepad.com/.a/6a00d8341c2df453ef017615d86b0a970c-500wi "Mad men - the phantom00068")](http://acephalous.typepad.com/.a/6a00d8341c2df453ef017615d86b0a970c-popup)

And that would be sex. “Isn’t that what you want?” she asks him, and 
 the look on his face is one of intense grief intermingling with 
physical  pain:

[![Mad men - the phantom00065](http://acephalous.typepad.com/.a/6a00d8341c2df453ef017615d86dcf970c-500wi "Mad men - the phantom00065")](http://acephalous.typepad.com/.a/6a00d8341c2df453ef017615d86dcf970c-popup)

Here the physical pain of the tooth and the psychological pain of the
  guilt collapse into a single close-up on the face of a man who has  
finally decided what he wants. He wants to go to the dentist:

[![Mad men - the phantom00023](http://acephalous.typepad.com/.a/6a00d8341c2df453ef016767e33d10970b-500wi "Mad men - the phantom00023")](http://acephalous.typepad.com/.a/6a00d8341c2df453ef016767e33d10970b-popup)

But not just any dentist—his abscess can only be treated by the  
phantom of his suicided brother, and unlike earlier in the episode, when
  Adam stood calm and composed on the elevator, this Adam clearly bears 
 the scars of his untimely end. Don’s not just remembering here, he’s  
facing the very memory he’s denied himself access to for nearly five  
years. The payoff is still a hole where a tooth should have been, only  
instead of it being a festering sore it’s just a hole. He can manage the
  hole, as he does by conceding to Megan’s wishes in order to make sure 
 he doesn’t find himself with another.

There’s clearly more to be discussed vis-a-vis holes and memories in 
 this episode—Pete’s paramour, Beth, will be using electroshock therapy 
 to create a Pete-shaped hole in her memory—but for now all I’ll say  
about that situation is that it seems at odds with an episode that deals
  with repression in such a psychoanalytic fashion. Lane’s suicides  
heralds the return of the repressed, which takes the forms an Adam and  
an abscess, and Don deals with both of them in a manner that speaks to  
increased psychological health. Beth, however, removes the need for any 
 sort of reintegration by obliterating the organ that records and  
reshapes memories. She is, by the episode’s end, less of herself than  
she was at its opening.

**CODA:** And then of course there’s this:

There was a photograph of the final scene that episode with all of them 
standing in front of the open windows. It may violate copyright so I'm 
yanking it.

The final shot of the episode. The kind of shot that only happens 
when people know they’re being photographed. It’s the weakest shot in 
the episode—it awkwardly strives for the kind of iconic status the 
show’s compositions typically acquire casually. It’s so annoying, in 
fact, that I deliberately avoided addressing it when the show first 
aired, and add this little coda to my original post just in case 
something in tonight’s episode happens to build off it in a way that 
recuperates its staged stiffness into something meaningful.

			
