## The first forty-five were mistakes, the forty-sixth an accident

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2013/02/the-first-forty-five-were-mistakes-the-forty-sixth-an-accident.html
 * Monday, February 11, 2013



The headline at the _LA Times_ reads "[Torrance neighborhood edgy after mistaken shootings](http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/lanow/2013/02/dorner-manhunt-torrance-neighborhood-mistaken-identity.html),"
 and the phrase "mistaken shootings" refers to the fact that there have 
been multiple incidents in which Los Angeles and Torrance police 
officers have opened fired on people who don't remotely resemble proud 
cop-killer Christopher Jordan Dorner: two Latina women delivering papers
 for the _Times_ and a white man sneaking in a morning surf. But 
calling these incidents "mistaken shootings" downplays both the extent 
of the mistake and the severity of the shootings. Consider the state of 
the truck driven by the _Times_ employees:

[![a lot of mistakes](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/02/a-lot-of-mistakes.jpg "a lot of mistakes")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/02/a-lot-of-mistakes.jpg)

I'm not sure what I find more disturbing: the fact that two members of the LAPD put _at least_
 forty-six bullets in the back of that truck or that the barrage only 
wounded the two women in the truck. Not that I wish them further injury,
 mind you, only that I'm uncomfortable with the level of incompetence 
such "marksmanship" seems to suggest, because the police are out in 
terrible force and they are angry. If you live where I do, you don't 
need to watch the news conferences or know that over 50 members of the 
force (and their families) are in protective custody to notice, and feel
 unsettled by, the heightened police presence in Riverside and Orange 
and LA counties. I literally can't go to the doughnut store without 
having to stand behind four grumpy sleep-deprived cops.\* I understand 
why the 15 and 91 were crawling with police vehicles last Thursday, as 
Dorner shot the officers in Corona a few miles from my apartment, but 
given that the search is now centered around Big Bear, I'm not sure why 
the continued police presence is necessary.

Especially when, since the "mistaken shootings" that happened last week, people who drive pickup trucks _of any make and model_
 are being encouraged to find alternative means of transportation until 
Dorner is dead or custody.\*\* Because you never know when an angry 
sleep-addled cop who can barely hit the back of an SUV will open fire on
 you because of who you could be, but clearly aren't. Having a standing 
army of incompetent shots occupy a few counties may not be the best way 
to calm civilian nerves. This strikes me as generally true, but even 
more so when the only stated targets are cops and the only victims 
unrelated to law enforcement personnel have been shot, mistakenly, by 
law enforcement personnel.

\*By which I mean, when I went to the doughnut store thisÂ  morning, I had to stand behind four grumpy sleep-deprived cops.

\*\*This despite the fact that the burnt husk of the truck in question was located on Saturday night.

		

* * *

### 1 Comment 

		

                
[]()

	

		![Ahistoricality](http://static.typepad.com/.shared:vee3ddd0:typepad:en\_us/default-userpics/04-50si.gif)
	

	

		

Nervous people with guns. Just the thing to make us all safer.

For some reason I'm reminded of the debate on campus when my undergraduate institution raised the possibility of considering having firearms-equipped security. Maybe it's a sign of my age that it didn't seem a good idea to a vast majority of the (fairly conservative) student body, and the extant unarmed security guards were exhibit A in the case against.

Keep your head down: last thing we need is another verse in your life ballad involving "accidental discharges"...

	

		Posted by:
		[Ahistoricality](http://ahistoricality.blogspot.com) |
		[Monday, 11 February 2013 at 01:25 PM](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2013/02/the-first-forty-five-were-mistakes-the-forty-sixth-an-accident.html?cid=6a00d8341c2df453ef017ee86a6953970d#comment-6a00d8341c2df453ef017ee86a6953970d)

		

        