## Awful Greek words that apply to "The Rains of Castamere"

 * Originally posted at http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2013/06/awful-greek-words-that-apply-to-the-rains-of-castamere.html
 * Saturday, June 08, 2013



When [we left off](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/2013/06/www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/2013/06/its-always-been-raining-in-castamere/), Catelyn was in the act of recognizing the terribleness of her moment. At [37:38 in the podcast](http://youtu.be/R3ablpE5Kks#t=37m38s),
 Steven and I argued about when the band began to play the song “The 
Rains of Castamere,” which is associated with House Lannister, and 
though this may seem like an insignificant detail, I don’t think it is. 
So I don’t want anyone to think that I’m arguing just to argue here, 
because this is one of the most important moments in traditional 
tragedy. In the _Poetics_, Aristotle claims that simple plots merely contain a catastrophe — something terrible happens for which _general_ pity is felt — but complex plots combine that tragedy with  __ _anagnorisis_, or a moment of recognition.

This moment of recognition is not had by the audience, but by a 
character within the play; that is, it’s had by a character with whom 
the audience sympathizes, and through whose perspective the consequences
 of this catastrophe can be understood. In other words, for Aristotle, 
the superior play is one in which the audience’s sympathies are 
focalized through a perspective in a way that personalizes the 
catastrophe. It’s not just _generally_ sad that these Trojans have to die, it’s _particularly_ sad that we’re forced to watch one of them we care about _realize_ he’s
 about to die. That’s the heart of traditional tragedy: it’s not the 
catastrophe itself (because the audience isn’t in actual jeopardy), but 
the sympathetic identification with the character who realizes he’s 
about to be killed (because that’s something the audience can actually 
feel) that makes a tragedy effective.

In other word: this moment is important because it’s _the engine of tragedy_.
 The audience may only realize what’s happening when “The Rains of 
Castamere” begins to play, but because tragedy’s supposed to lead to 
reflection, it’s important to determine exactly when Catelyn does. So 
here we go. Robb and Talisa are having a long and playful conversation 
that ends in   her informing him that she’s carrying a child named 
“Eddard Stark.”  I’ve  animated the 33-second-long conversation so you 
can see that it   consists of 15 reversals and one pan down:

		

					[]()
			

[![red wedding04](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/red-wedding04.gif "red wedding04")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/red-wedding04.gif)

There are a number of things to note about this sequence, including that these are shallow focus two-shots, meaning that the only
 two characters in focus are Robb and Talisa and that they share the 
frame in each of the fifteen reversals. Sharing the frame in a two-shot 
cements in the audience’s mind the connection between particular 
characters. This works when they’re strangers — but even more so when 
they’re already a married pregnant couple and bellies are being touched.
 The number of reversals means the length of each shot is a little over 
two seconds, which is on par with [_Mission Impossible: Ghost Protocol_ (sandstorm chase)](http://www.cinemetrics.lv/database.php?sort=asl), [_G.I. Joe: Retaliation_ (opening sequence)](http://www.cinemetrics.lv/database.php?sort=asl), and [_Casino Royale_ (first 12 minutes not including precredits)](http://www.cinemetrics.lv/database.php?sort=asl), _i.e. action sequences in films with already very short shot lengths_.
 If there’s a reason their exchange feels oddly rushed, it’s because 
it’s being filmed at the pace of an action sequence. Except it isn’t 
one. _Which is unsettling_. Moreover, that Robb and Talisa are together in the shallow focus creates the impression that [they’re alone in a world that’s literally dissolved behind them](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/2013/04/surprisingly-not-unwatchable-hannibal). Except they aren’t. _Which is also unsettling._ The
 final shot in this sequence — the one that follows Robb’s acquiescence 
to Talisa’s “demand” to name his child “Eddard” — is a tender conclusion
 to an “action sequence” in which we’re led to believe [the couple’s stopped the world and melted with each other](http://youtu.be/LuN6gs0AJls):

[![red wedding00310](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/red-wedding00310.png "red wedding00310")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/red-wedding00310.png)

But after all those accelerated reversals, Nutter _slowly_ pans to the left to remind us that the world’s continued spinning in their “absence,” then racks the focus onto Catelyn:

[![red wedding00314](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/red-wedding00314.png "red wedding00314")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/red-wedding00314.png)

It’s unclear whether she actually overheard their discussion and 
knows that her grandchild will be named after her beloved husband — for 
her sake I hope she _didn’t_ overhear their conversation, as that
 would only make what follows all the worse — but the look on her face 
is one of happiness tinged with understandable grief. She’s just lost 
her husband and her father, and she believes she’s lost her other two 
sons and daughters too. Hers is the face of a grieving woman finding 
peace in what little joy remains in her world. Robb’s all she knows she
 has left, so that Nutter makes this shot about _her_ is significant. The 
audience experiences Robb and Talisa’s happiness _through_ Catelyn’s observation of it. She’s the character through whom Nutter’s focalizing all that follows. And it follows quickly:

[![red wedding00315](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/red-wedding00315.png "red wedding00315")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/red-wedding00315.png)

A Frey — Steven identifies him as Black Walder Frey, but in this shot
 he’s just a blurry-hatted interruption — passes between Catelyn and 
Robb and heads off-frame left. Instead of continuing to bask vicariously
 in the happiness of the only child of which she still has proof of 
life, her eyes follow the Frey:

[![red wedding00318](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/red-wedding00318.png "red wedding00318")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/red-wedding00318.png)

Nutter jumps to a behind-the-shoulder long shot of her watching Black Walder approach the door at 43:43:

[![red wedding00319](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/red-wedding00319.png "red wedding00319")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/red-wedding00319.png)

At 43:45 the generic wedding music stops and at 43:46 the camera 
reverses to her in a medium shot. We can see the concern on her face, 
sort of, but more importantly we can see her body language. She’s 
clutching her scarf defensively and reflexively:

[![red wedding00321](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/red-wedding00321.png "red wedding00321")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/red-wedding00321.png)

We know that we’re watching her watching Black Walder close the door, but then Nutter cuts to _her point of view_ just in case we didn’t know whose head and heartbreak we’re supposed to be sharing:

[![red wedding00323](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/red-wedding00323.png "red wedding00323")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/red-wedding00323.png)

And now we’re in her head as the doors close. We’re not in there for 
long, but we don’t need to be. We don’t need to see what follows from 
her perspective to be sympathetic with it at this point. For all 
practical purposes “we’re already in there.” Nutter knows this — and he 
knows that this scene’s going to rely on Michelle Fairley’s reaction to 
what she’s about to witness — so he leaves her head and straddles her 
shoulder again as the doors loudly slam shut at 43:54:

[![red wedding00329](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/red-wedding00329.png "red wedding00329")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/red-wedding00329.png)

For two seconds all that’s heard is the background noise of the 
banquet. Then, at 43:57, Catelyn begins to turn and the band begins to 
play. Her initial glance at 44:00 goes in the direction of Walder Frey:

[![red wedding00334](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/red-wedding00334.png "red wedding00334")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/red-wedding00334.png)

But her eyes quickly move upwards when she recognizes the song at 44:02:

[![red wedding00336](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/red-wedding00336.png "red wedding00336")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/red-wedding00336.png)

There’s a slight [thinking zoom](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2012/01/follow-that-thought.html)
 that accompanies her recognition of “The Rains of Castamere,” not 
because the recognition itself or all that it entails is by any means 
slight, but because she’s just seen the doors shut and heard the 
orchestra tuning up the accompaniment to Walder and the Lannister’s 
endgame. She knows the credits are about to roll on what remains of her 
family and is powerless to do anything about it. _Anagnorisis_ is
 a moment of intense pain and impotence. She can no more stop the 
Lannister’s plot than Oedipus could un-murder his father or un-sire the 
children he bore with his mother. _There’s nothing to be done now but begin to preemptively suffer_.
 This is why the Red Wedding was equally effective on those who knew it 
was coming and those who didn’t: tragedy doesn’t depend on the surprise 
discovered in the moment of recognition so much as the intensity of the 
emotions that pre-accompany it. It’s the pain you feel immediately 
before you understand exactly why you’re feeling it.

I don’t want to dwell on the horror of the events themselves, [which have been discussed elsewhere by my betters](http://thinkprogress.org/alyssa/2013/06/05/2103271/game-of-thrones-red-wedding-and-why-television-makes-pregnancy-and-childbirth-so-violent/),
 but I do want to acknowledge one last twist of the knife in this episode. It’s
 noted in the books that Arya resembles her father and his people, the 
Starks, more than Catelyn and her people, the Tullys. And throughout the
 series that’s generally been true: the various directors have 
emphasized the length of Michelle Fairley’s face instead of its width. 
They’ve minimized her high cheekbones by shooting her face as they do 
above: at a slightly oblique angle and partially shadowed, which makes 
it look longer than it actually is. But in the moment immediately before
 her death — a moment in which, unbeknownst to her, the daughter she 
thinks dead is but one wall removed — Nutter films her straight on:

[![red wedding00286](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/red-wedding00286.png "red wedding00286")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/red-wedding00286.png)

She’s almost unrecognizable. Her grief-stricken face is wider and 
seems shorter. Even when he moves into an angled close-up, by lighting 
both sides of her face equally he maximizes the impression of its width:

[![red wedding00298](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/red-wedding00298.png "red wedding00298")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/red-wedding00298.png)

Which wouldn’t be significant except for this:

[![red wedding00234](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/red-wedding00234.png "red wedding00234")](http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/red-wedding00234.png)

As Arya has her own moment of recognition, Nutter goes to great 
lengths to remind the audience that she’s her mother’s daughter. Maisie 
Williams and Michelle Fairley never look so alike as they do in this 
terrible moment. That these moments are _respective_ and that both face them alone is something I’d rather not think about.

			
