## Don Draper is, of course, never himself.

 * Originally posted at http://www.thevalve.org/go/valve/article/don_dra/

* Monday, January 18, 2010 

Let me open with a quick clarification about [the previous _Mad Men_ post](http://www.thevalve.org/go/valve/article/don_draper_as_an_unraptured_emma_bovary/).  As to the purview of self-fashioning, we all do it.  In blog terms, you know me as [this guy](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2007/12/unbelievable-th.html), _i.e._ the one who [caught those students](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2005/11/my_morning.html), made that [other one extremely uncomfortable](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2007/03/and_yet_i_still.html), is [frequently victimized by the library](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2007/10/cashier.html), hid [his cancer from his wife](http://acephalous.typepad.com/acephalous/2007/12/how-sek-hid-can.html), etc.  Those are the stories I tell about myself to explain myself to myself.  To quote Gertrude Stein from [_Everybody's Autobiography_](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1878972081/diesekoschmar-20):

Identity is funny being yourself is funny as you are never yourself to yourself except as you remember yourself and then of course you do not believe yourself.  That is really the trouble with an autobiography you do not of course really believe yourself why should you, you know so well so very well that it is not yourself, it could not be yourself because you cannot remember right and if you do remember right it does not sound right and of course it does not sound right because it is not right.  You are of course never yourself.

The phrase "of course" captures the central irony of all self-fashioning: we know, of course, that we are more than the sum total of the stories we tell ourselves about ourselves, and yet we only understand ourselves, and can only be understood by others, through those stories.  In case you ever wanted to know why narrative diversity is important, there you have it: the more narrative modes available, the more possible understandings of themselves the people who encounter them can have.  This is self-fashioning at its most mundane, and in terms of _Mad Men_, this is why Peggy Olson becomes more modern: once she understands herself in terms of the upwardly mobile career-oriented woman, the audience understands her frustrations in terms of the conflict between that meritocratic fantasy and the realities of being a woman in a male-dominated working environment.  She becomes more recognizably modern not because the world she inhabits does, but because the way she responds to that changing world elicits a chorus of "of courses."  

Neither she nor Peter Campbell become "more real" as the series progresses—fictional characters, being fictional, can only aspire to escape the fictions they inhabit—but as the stories they tell themselves about themselves in order to understand themselves come to resemble ours, they'll seem more realistic because they're telling themselves the same stories we tell ourselves and we, of course, live in the real world.  What I meant when I wrote the following, then, is that Campbell is increasingly understanding himself in reference to the same narratives we do, whereas Don Draper is not:

Campbell is, in a sense, becoming _us_, and we revile his behavior to the extent that we recognize our sins in his actions.  Draper, however, is becoming _art_, and as such we hold him as responsible for his actions as we would Emma Bovary.  His self-fashioning was not merely based on literary precedent, it was an act of literature, if you will, and much of the appeal of the show is based on watching an inscrutable literary character interact with actual humans.

Draper's self-fashioning is not remotely this mundane—it is radical.  He envisions himself not in the way a person envisions his or her self, but in the way an author envisions a character, which is why Joseph Kugelmass [refers to it](http://www.thevalve.org/go/valve/article/i_dont_care_what_the_critics_say_i_love_mad_men_and_the_sopranos_and_the_hi/#comments) as _aesthetic_ self-fashioning.  To a certain extent, this is how my blog functions, _i.e._ as a stylized version of the life I actually live and the person I actually am; but because there are stories central to my conception of myself that have not and will never make it on the blog, the person you associate with my name will always feel, to me, like a persona.  If _withholding_ certain core stories so alters the warp and woof of my persona that it aestheticizes my self-fashioning, you can imagine what would happen were I to start _inventing those stories whole cloth à la_ Draper.  

The only people who know him on the show are the dead actors in his increasingly frequent hallucinations, because only they have access to his entire allotment of self-narratives—and, of course, they only have that access because they _are_ the stories he tells himself about himself.  The audience is privy to some of them, but not the entire store, which is why Draper remains ever at a remove.  To the extent that _Mad Men_ belongs to Draper, it is a story about someone will never be able to integrate his stories with the ones he wants told about him _even to himself_.  His hallucinations bully and hector him in order to remind him "that it does not sound right and of course it does not sound right because it is not right," because the troubled antecedent of Stein's "it" is even more troubling when the narratives that constitute identity are the convenient inventions of an unsettled soul.

If this conception of self-fashioning seems less _modern_ than _modernist_, that would be my point: the manner in which Draper is integrating his competing narratives into a semi-coherent sense of self is entirely consonant with the modernist obsession with integrating competing narratives into semi-coherent sense of self.  From the unstable "I" in [Samuel Beckett's trilogy]("&lt;a) to the endless renegotiation of familial roles in [Joyce's _Ulysses_](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0141182806/diesekoschmar-20), literary modernists sought to explode the tidy, reducible self that had been the hallmark of literary realism.  Draper is, then, something of an exploded man sifting through bits of himself in search of the core to which all these bits once belonged.  However, until he accomplishes this impossibility, his self-fashioning will still be far more aesthetic than that of the other characters on _Mad Men_, and as such, the show's literate audience will still be drawn to him more than them.

I keep on meaning for these _Mad Men_ posts to move beyond Draper so I can talk about Joan or visual rhetoric, but I can't quit Draper quite yet.

(_x-posted around the block, back again, then once more for good measure._)

---

Great post. I like what you have to say about Draper's self fashioning. The show is my favorite on TV and it's great to see you post on it here. I know you are still watching, but I was always intrigued by line when Draper mused that someday he would do "something else"  For some reason, I keep thinking that same sort of self creation would continue and Draper would become a reclusive novelist stuck in his era. The model would be Don Delillo, who writes only about the time in which he's experienced and gives it his own knowing postmodern spin.  Since you are on episode 7 (I think) you will next see Draper's stark existentialism shown in The Hobo Code "I hate to break it to you, but there is no big lie, there is no system" 

 But this is self learned and introspective and you will see him pick up some books along the way but the impression to me is that is enthralled more with his own literary creation.  But in the end, as he becomes older, I see Draper as an idealized writer standing in for the show's creator, Matthew Weiner. But I think a modified Delillo model may work for the future Draper. Delillo DID work as a copywriter for Ogilvy and Mather for a stint. However Delillo said "I did not quit to be a writer. I quit because I did not want to work anymore" Not exactly what the workaholic Draper would say and I'm not sure Delillo looked as good in a suit.

By [Christopher Hellstrom](http://www.thevalve.org/go/member/243/) on 01/19/10 at 01:17 AM | [Permanent link to this comment](http://www.thevalve.org/go/valve/article/don_dra/#27258)
[]()

Mad Men is no Deadwood! 

Speaking of hiding cancer from ones wife, I just watched the first season of Breaking Bad, about which I'd heard very good things. I was unmoved, in large part because the main character is a flaming asshole of the first order, impossible to sympathize with in any meaningful way. The scene where the son turns to him and says "Just Fucking die Already" pretty much represented my perspective. 

Mad Men is still the reason to tune into AMC. 

There is no longer any reason, that I can see, to pay for HBO. Ubi sunt?

By  on 01/21/10 at 04:09 PM | [Permanent link to this comment](http://www.thevalve.org/go/valve/article/don_dra/#27273)

